The novel is divided into five sections, or "books". Frederic Henry narrates the story in the first-person.

Lieutenant Frederic Henry is an Americanmedicserving in theItalian Army, who speaksItalian. The novel begins during the First World War. It is the start of winter, when acholeraepidemic kills thousands of soldiers. Frederic visitsGorizia, where he meets other army fellows and the priest. He finds there are twobrothels–  one for officers and the other for lower-rank soldiers. On his return, he shares his experience with his friend, Surgeon Rinaldi, who is about the same age as Frederic.

Rinaldi is fond of beautiful women. He has fallen in love with an English nurse named Catherine Barkley, though not so seriously. Rinaldi takes Frederic to a British hospital, where Frederic is introduced to, and attracted to, Catherine. She tells him about her fiancé, who was killed in battle, and also about feeling uncomfortable in the rain, as it starts to rain. Frederic tries to kiss her, but she refuses and slaps him.  She regrets doing so and eventually warms to him and they kiss.

Frederic and his fellow drivers (Passini, Manera, Gordini and Gavuzzi) take the ambulance into war. Passini is killed in amortarattack. Frederic is severely wounded in the knee on theItalian frontand is sent to the hospital.

Surgeon Rinaldi visits Frederic in the hospital and praises him for his heroism, but Frederic denies any display of such. Rinaldi also tells him that he will be shifted to a hospital in Milan soon for a better treatment. Frederic requests him to have Catherine there as a nurse. The priest pays a visit. In a discussion again, Frederic expresses his views against war. Meanwhile, America has declared war on Germany, and the Italian army is also anxious about war against Austria. Frederic reaches an American hospital in Milan. There he is nursed by Miss Gage, Mrs. Walker and their Superintendent Miss Van Campen. Miss Gage arranges wine for him. Catherine arrives there, and Frederic realizes a strong sense of love and passion for her. They make love for the first time. Doctor Valentini comes to examine his injury and X-rays. This book portrays the growth of Frederic's relationship with Catherine over the summer. They enjoy boating and horse races. Meanwhile, Frederic meets Helen Ferguson, a fellow nurse of Catherine. After his knee heals, Frederic is diagnosed withjaundice. A three-weeks convalescent leave is sanctioned for him. Miss Van Campen discovers empty liquor bottles in Frederic's room and takes alcoholism as the cause for his condition. She also concludes that Frederic is knowingly keeping himself ill to avoid the war front. She files a report for the cancellation of convalescent leave, and Frederic is called back to the war front. Catherine informs him that she is three-months pregnant. They promise to reunite and marry after his return from war. Frederic asks her to take care of "Little Catherine".

Frederic returns to Gorizia. Rinaldi comes and examines his wounded leg. He further asks whether they have married or not. The priest notices a change in Frederic and also predicts that the war will end soon. Frederic travels toBainsizza, where he meets Gino, who tells him about an artillery battery of terrifying guns that the Austrians have. Frederic realizes that Italians will not escape if the Austrians attack. It rains heavily, and the bombarding begins. Frederic discovers that morale has severely dropped. Not long afterwards, theAustro-Hungariansbreak through the Italian lines in theBattle of Caporetto, and the Italians retreat. The houses are evacuated. Women and children are loaded in trucks. At the villa, Frederic discovers that Rinaldi has taken off for the hospital; everyone else has evacuated too. There is considerable delay and chaos on the road during the retreat, and Frederic, wishing to avoid a possible aerial attack while stuck on the main retreat route, decides to take an alternate path. He and his men quickly get lost, and their cars are stuck in the mud, Frederic orders the two engineering sergeants riding with Bonello to help. Afraid of being overtaken by the enemy, they refuse and try to leave. Frederic draws his gun and shoots one of them; the other escapes. One of the drivers, Aymo, is later killed, while another, Bonello, runs away to surrender to the Austrians. Frederic and his last companion, Piani, catch up to the main retreat across the Tagliamento river. As soon as they cross the bridge, Frederic is taken by the military police to a place on the river bank where officers are being interrogated and executed for the "treachery" that supposedly led to the Italian defeat. Frederic escapes by jumping into the river. Afterwards, he walks through the plains and jumps aboard a moving train to Milan to find Catherine.

Reaching Milan, he learns that Catherine has left forStresa. He goes to visit Ralph Simmons, one of the opera singers that he encountered earlier, and asks about the procedures for traveling to Switzerland. Ralph helps him, giving him civilian clothes. Frederic feels very odd in those clothes, as the people look at him scornfully. He reachesStresaby train and goes to theGrand Hotel des Iles Borromées. Emilio, a bartender, informs him that two English nurses are staying at a small hotel near the train station. Frederic meets Catherine and Helen Ferguson there. He also meets Count Greffi, a very old nobleman whom Frederic had met on his last visit to Stresa. Greffi is staying with his niece. Frederic avoids Catherine's question about the war experiences. He feels that he is a criminal, a war deserter. Emilio informs him that Italian police are looking to arrest him. Catherine and Frederic plan to flee toSwitzerlandas Emilio makes all possible arrangements for their travel in arowboat. Because of a storm, the waters are choppy and rough. Frederic rows the boat all night, and Catherine also takes a turn rowing. Finally, they reach Switzerland. The guards verify their identity and provide them provisional visas for staying in Switzerland.

Frederic and Catherine live a quiet life in the mountains. They move to a wooden house on a mountain outside the village ofMontreux. They develop new acquaintance with Mr. and Mrs. Guttingen. At times, Catherine starts getting concerned about their child, especially about its health. They move to the town ofLausanneto be closer to the hospital. Later, Catherine goes into labor and is taken to the hospital. The doctor tells Frederic that the best solution would be acaesarean operation. She suffers a lot of pain and finally delivers astillbornbaby boy. Later the nurse tells him that Catherine is hemorrhaging. He is terrified. He goes to see her, and she dies with him by her side. He leaves the hospital and walks back to his hotel in the rain.

The novel was partly based on Hemingway's own experiences serving in theItalian campaignsduring the First World War. The inspiration for Catherine Barkley wasAgnes von Kurowsky, a nurse who cared for Hemingway in a hospital in Milan after he had been wounded. He had planned to marry her, but she spurned his love when he returned to America.[6]Kitty Cannell, a Paris-based fashion correspondent, became Helen Ferguson. The unnamed priest was based on Don Giuseppe Bianchi, the priest of the 69th and 70th regiments of the Brigata Ancona. Although the sources for Rinaldi are unknown, the character had already appeared inIn Our Time.

Much of the plot was written in correspondence with Frederic J. Agate. Agate, Hemingway's friend, had a collection of letters to his wife from his time in Italy, which were later used as inspiration.[7]

Michael Reynolds, however, writes that Hemingway was not involved in the battles described. Because his previous novel,The Sun Also Rises, had been written as aroman à clef, readers assumedA Farewell to Armsto be autobiographical.[4]A Farewell to Armswas begun during his time at Willis M. Spear's guest ranch in Wyoming's Bighorns.[8]Some pieces of the novel were written inPiggott, Arkansas, atthe homeof his then-wife Pauline Pfeiffer,[9]and inMission Hills, Kansas, while she was awaiting delivery of their baby.[10]Pauline underwent acaesarean sectionas Hemingway was writing the scene about Catherine Barkley's childbirth.[11]

Hemingway struggled with the ending. By his count, he wrote 39 versions of it "before [he] was satisfied".[12]However, a 2012 edition of the book included no fewer than 47 alternate endings.[12]

The novel was first serialized inScribner's Magazinein the May 1929 to October 1929 issues. The book was published in September 1929 with afirst editionprint-run of approximately 31,000 copies.[13]The success ofA Farewell to Armsmade Hemingway financially independent.[14]

The Hemingway Library Editionwas released in July 2012, with a dust jacket facsimile of the first edition. The newly published edition presents an appendix with the many alternate endings Hemingway wrote for the novel in addition to pieces from early draft manuscripts.[15]

TheJohn F. Kennedy Presidential Library and MuseumHemingway collection has two handwritten pages with possible titles for the book. Most of the titles come fromThe Oxford Book of English Verse.[16]One of the possible titles Hemingway considered wasIn Another Country and Besides. This comes fromThe Jew of MaltabyChristopher Marlowe. The poemPortrait of a LadybyT. S. Eliotalso starts off by quoting this Marlowe work: "Thou hast committed / Fornication: but that was in another country, / And besides, the wench is dead." Hemingway's library included both works by Eliot and Marlowe.[17]

There are at least two copies of the first edition into which Hemingway had re-inserted the censored text[clarification needed]by hand to provide a corrected text. One of these copies was presented toMaurice Coindreau, the other toJames Joyce.[18]Hemingway's corrected text was finally inserted into one edition of the novel,[19]and there are some audiobook versions that are uncensored.[citation needed]

A Farewell to Armswasbannedin theIrish Free State.[20]

Also, the novel could not be published in Italy until 1948 because theFascist regimeconsidered it detrimental to the honor of theArmed Forces, both in its description of theBattle of Caporettoand because of a certainanti-militarismimplied in the work. More than one biographer has suggested that, at the base of the censorship of the Fascist regime in the novel, there had also been a personal antipathy between the writer andBenito Mussolini. Hemingway had interviewed him in 1923, shortly after he had seized power, and in Hemingway's article in theToronto Starhe poured scorn on Mussolini, calling him "the biggest bluff in Europe". But, apart from the official reactions, it is known that Mussolini did not like the article at all: Hemingway described Mussolini as trying to impress the media by pretending to be deeply absorbed in reading, while in reality he was holding a French–English dictionary upside down.[21]The Italian translation had in fact already been prepared illegally in 1943 byFernanda Pivano, leading to her arrest inTurin.

A Farewell to Armswas met with favorable criticism and is considered one of Hemingway's best literary works.[22]

Gore Vidalwrote of the text: "... a work of ambition, in which can be seen the beginning of the careful, artful, immaculate idiocy of tone that since has marked ... [Hemingway's] prose".[23]The last line of the 1929New York Timesreview reads: "It is a moving and beautiful book."[24]

Bakerremarks on the theme ofA Farewell to Arms: "After ten years of meditation and digestive of his experience, Hemingway lays before his readers a work which is far from a mere war experience, nor a story of love and death during the war."

However, since publication,A Farewell to Armshas also been the target of various controversy. Upon its flimsy publication—due to the medium of its release—throughScribner's Magazine, it was banned from Boston newsstands due to accusations of a pornographic nature, despite Hemingway's deliberate exclusion of graphic descriptions of sex, using omission as a literary device.[25]

The novel was first adapted for the stage byLaurence Stallingsin 1930,[26]then as afilm in 1932, with a1957 remake. Athree-part television miniserieswas made in 1966. In December 2023, a new film adaptation was announced, withMichael Winterbottomto direct andTom Blythto star.[27]

The 1996 filmIn Love and War, directed byRichard Attenboroughand starringChris O'DonnellandSandra Bullock, depicts Hemingway's life in Italy as an ambulance driver in the events prior to his writing ofA Farewell to Arms.[citation needed]

A radio broadcast adaption wasproduced in 1937as part of the Lux Radio Theater series, starringClark GableandJosephine Hutchinson. In 2011, BBC Radio 4 produced a 10-episode[28]adaptation for their15 Minute Dramaseries.