Dickens opens the novel with a sentence that has become famous:

In 1775,Jerry Cruncherflags down the nightly mail-coach en route from London toDover. Cruncher is an employee of Tellson's Bank in London; he carries a message forJarvis Lorry, one of the bank's managers. Lorry sends Jerry back with the cryptic response "Recalled to Life", referring toAlexandre Manette, a French physician who has been released from theBastilleafter an 18-year imprisonment. On arrival in Dover, Lorry meets Dr. Manette's daughterLucieand her governess,Miss Pross. Believing her father to be dead, Lucie faints at the news that he is alive. Lorry takes her to France for a reunion.

In the Paris neighbourhood of theFaubourg Saint-Antoine, Dr. Manette has been given lodgings by his former servant Ernest Defarge and his wife Therese, the owners of a wine shop. Lorry and Lucie find him in a small garret where he spends much of his time distractedly and obsessively making shoes – a skill he learned in prison. Lorry and Lucie take him back to England.

In 1780, FrenchémigréCharles Darnayis on trial in London for treason against the British Crown. The key witnesses against him are two British spies, John Barsad and Roger Cly. Barsad claims that he would recognise Darnay anywhere, but Darnay's lawyer points out that his colleague in court,Sydney Carton, bears a strong resemblance to the prisoner. With Barsad's testimony thus undermined, Darnay is acquitted.

In Paris, the hated and abusiveMarquis St. Evrémondeorders his carriage driven recklessly fast through the crowded streets, hitting and killing a child. The Marquis throws a coin to the child's father, Gaspard, to compensate him for his loss; as the Marquis drives on, the coin is flung back into the carriage.

Arriving at his countrychâteau, the Marquis meets Darnay, his nephew and heir. Out of disgust with his aristocratic family, the nephew has replaced his surname (St. Evrémonde) with Darnay, an anglicised version of mother's maiden name (D'Aulnais). He despises the Marquis' views that "Repression is the only lasting philosophy. The dark deference of fear and slavery ... will keep the dogs obedient to the whip, as long as this roof [looking up to it] shuts out the sky."[7]That night, Gaspard creeps into the château and stabs and kills the Marquis in his sleep. He avoids capture for nearly a year, but is eventually hanged in the nearby village.

In London, Carton confesses his love to Lucie, but quickly recognises that she does not love him. He nevertheless promises to "embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear to you".[8]Darnay asks for Dr. Manette's permission to wed Lucie, and he agrees. On the morning of the marriage, Darnay reveals his real name and lineage to Dr. Manette, facts that Manette had asked him to withhold until that day. The unexpected revelation causes Dr. Manette to revert to his obsessive shoemaking. He returns to sanity before their return from honeymoon, and the whole incident is kept secret from Lucie.

As the years pass, Lucie and Charles raise a family in England: a son (who dies in childhood) and a daughter, little Lucie. Lorry finds a second home with them. Carton, though he seldom visits, is accepted as a close friend and becomes a special favourite of little Lucie.

In Paris in July 1789, the Defarges help to lead thestorming of the Bastille, a symbol of royal tyranny. Defarge enters Dr. Manette's former cell and searches it thoroughly. Throughout the countryside, local officials and other representatives of the aristocracy are slaughtered, and the St. Evrémonde château is burned to the ground.

In 1792, Lorry travels to France to save important documents stored at Tellson's Paris branch from the chaos of theFrench Revolution. Darnay receives a letter from Gabelle, one of his uncle's former servants who has been imprisoned by the revolutionaries, pleading for Darnay (now the Marquis St. Evrémonde) to help secure his release. Without telling his family or revealing his position as the new marquis, Darnay also sets out for Paris.

On his way to Paris, Darnay is arrested as a returning emigrated aristocrat and jailed inLa Force Prison. Hoping to be able to save him, Dr. Manette, Lucie and her daughter, Jerry, and Miss Pross all move to Paris and take up lodgings near those of Lorry.

Fifteen months later Darnay is finally tried, and Dr. Manette – viewed as a popular hero after his long imprisonment in the Bastille – testifies on his behalf. Darnay is acquitted and released, but is re-arrested later that day.

While running errands with Jerry, Miss Pross is amazed to run into her long-lost brother Solomon. Now posing as a Frenchman, he is an employee of the revolutionary authorities and one of Darnay's gaolers. Carton also recognises him – as Barsad, one of the spies who tried to frame Darnay at his trial in 1780. Solomon is desperate to keep his true identity hidden, and Carton blackmails him into helping with a play by threatening to denounce him as an English spy.

Darnay's retrial the following day is based on new denunciations by the Defarges and on a manuscript that Defarge had found in Dr. Manette's Bastille cell. Defarge reads the manuscript to the tribunal. In it, Dr. Manette had recorded that his imprisonment was at the hands of the Evrémonde brothers (Darnay's father and uncle) after he had tried to report their crimes. Darnay's uncle had kidnapped and raped a peasant girl. Her brother, first hiding his remaining younger sister, had gone to confront the uncle, who ran him through with his sword. In spite of the best efforts of Dr. Manette, both the elder sister and the brother died. Dr. Manette's manuscript concludes by denouncing the Evrémondes, "them and their descendants, to the last of their race."[9]The jury takes that as irrefutable proof of Darnay's guilt, and he is condemned to die by theguillotinethe next afternoon.

In the Defarges' wine shop, Carton discovers that Madame Defarge is the surviving sister of the peasant family, and he overhears her planning to denounce Lucie and her daughter. He visits Lorry and warns him that Lucie and her family must be ready to flee the next day. He extracts a promise that they will be waiting for him at 2 pm, ready to leave the instant he returns.

Shortly before the executions are due to begin, Carton puts his plan into effect. With Barsad's reluctant assistance, he gains access to Darnay's prison cell. Carton drugs his lookalike and trades places with him. Then he has Barsad carry Darnay out to the carriage, where Lorry and the family are awaiting Carton. They flee to England with Darnay.

Meanwhile, Madame Defarge goes to Lucie's lodgings, hoping to apprehend her and her daughter. There she finds Miss Pross, who is waiting for Jerry so they can follow the family out of Paris. The two women struggle and Madame Defarge's pistol discharges, killing her and permanently deafening Miss Pross.

As Carton waits to board thetumbrilthat will take him to his execution, he is approached by another prisoner, a seamstress. Carton comforts her, telling her that their ends will be quick and that the worries of their lives will not follow them into "the better land where ... [they] will be mercifully sheltered." A final prophetic thought runs through his mind in which he visualises a better future for the family and their descendants.

Dickens closes with Carton's final prophetic vision as he contemplates the guillotine:[10]

In order of appearance:

Chapter 2

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 6

Chapter 7