Anne Shirley, a young orphan from the fictional community of Bolingbroke,Nova Scotia(based upon the real community ofNew London, Prince Edward Island),[16][17]is sent to live with Marilla and Matthew Cuthbert, unmarried siblings in their fifties and sixties, after a childhood spent in strangers' homes and orphanages. Marilla and Matthew had originally sought to adopt a boy from the orphanage to help Matthew run their farm atGreen Gables, which is set in the fictional town of Avonlea (based onCavendish, Prince Edward Island). Through a misunderstanding, the orphanage sends Anne instead.

Anne is fanciful, imaginative, eager to please, and dramatic. She is also adamant her name should always be spelled with an "e" at the end. However, she is defensive about her appearance, despising her red hair, freckles, and pale, thin frame, but liking her nose. She is talkative, especially when it comes to describing her fantasies and dreams. At first, stern Marilla says Anne must return to the orphanage, but after much observation and consideration, along with kind, quiet Matthew's encouragement, Marilla decides to let her stay.

Anne takes much joy in life and adapts quickly, thriving in the close-knit farming village. Her imagination and talkativeness soon brighten up Green Gables.

The book recounts Anne's struggles and joys in settling into Green Gables (the first real home she's ever known): the country school where she quickly excels in her studies; her friendship with Diana Barry, the girl living next door (her best or "bosom friend" as Anne fondly calls her); her budding literary ambitions; and her rivalry with her classmateGilbert Blythe, who teases her about her red hair. For that, he earns her instant hatred, although he apologizes several times. As time passes, however, Anne realizes she no longer hates Gilbert, but her pride and stubbornness keep her from speaking to him.

The book also follows Anne's adventures in Avonlea. Episodes include playtime with her friends Diana, calm, placid Jane Andrews, and beautiful, boy-crazy Ruby Gillis. She has run-ins with the unpleasant Pye sisters, Gertie and Josie, and frequent domestic "scrapes" such as dyeing her hair green while intending to dye it black, and accidentally getting Diana drunk by giving her what she thinks is raspberry cordial but which turns out to be currant wine.

At sixteen, Anne goes to Queen's Academy to earn a teaching license, along with Gilbert, Ruby, Josie, Jane, and several other students, excluding Diana, much to Anne's dismay. She obtains her license in one year instead of the usual two and wins the Avery Scholarship awarded to the top student in English. This scholarship would allow her to pursue a Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) degree at the fictional Redmond College (based on the realDalhousie College) on the mainland in Nova Scotia.

Near the end of the book, however, tragedy strikes when Matthew dies of a heart attack after learning that all of his and Marilla's money has been lost in a bank failure. Out of devotion to Marilla and Green Gables, Anne gives up the scholarship to stay at home and help Marilla, whose eyesight is failing. She plans to teach at the Carmody school, the nearest school available, and return to Green Gables on weekends. In an act of friendship, Gilbert Blythe gives up his teaching position at the Avonlea School in favor of Anne, to work at the White Sands School instead, knowing that Anne wants to stay close to Marilla after Matthew's death. After this kind act, Anne and Gilbert's friendship is cemented, and Anne looks forward to what life will bring next.

Anne of Green Gableswas first published byL.C. Page & Co.ofBostonon June 13, 1908.[18]The book quickly became a best-seller, selling over 19,000 copies in the first five months. Since then, over 50 million copies have been sold worldwide.[19]A full scan of the first edition, first impression is provided by the L. M. Montgomery Institute.

Montgomery's original manuscript is preserved by theConfederation Centre of the Arts, in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island. Since 2022, the Centre has hosted a project in which digital images of the entire manuscript can be examined online. A transcript of the manuscript was published by Nimbus Publishing in 2019.

Montgomery's original typescript and the corrected proofs are lost.[20]

The first edition has errors in the text. Critical editions will identify corrections that have been applied to the text by the editor. The choice of corrections depends on the editor and varies across editions. As an example, thePenguin Classicsedition,[21]edited by Benjamin Lefebvre, lists the following corrections:

Based on the popularity of her first book, Montgomery wrote a series of sequels to continue the story of her heroine Anne Shirley.

The prequel,Before Green Gables(2008), was written byBudge Wilsonwith the authorization of the heirs of L. M. Montgomery.

TheGreen Gablesfarmhouse is located inCavendish, Prince Edward Island. Many tourist attractions onPrince Edward Islandhave been developed based on the fictional Anne, and provincial license plates once bore her image.[22]Balsam Hollow, the forest that inspired the Haunted Woods and Campbell Pond, the body of water which inspired The Lake of Shining Waters, both described in the book, are located in the vicinity.[23]In addition, theConfederation Centre of the Artshas featured the wildly successfulAnne of Green Gables musicalon its mainstage every summer for over five decades, until 2020 and the Covid pandemic.[24]The Anne of Green Gables Museum is located in Park Corner, PEI, in a home that inspired L. M. Montgomery.[25]

The province and tourist facilities have highlighted the local connections to the internationally popular novels.Anne of Green Gableshas been translated into 36 languages.[26][27]"Tourism byAnnefans is an important part of the Island economy".[28]Merchants offer items based on the novels.

In 2019, Canadian publishing company Bradan Press crowdfunded aScottish-Gaelictranslation ofAnne of Green Gables, titled Anna Ruadh, through the crowdfunding websiteKickstarter. The book, released in 2020, is the first Scottish-Gaelic translation ofAnne of Green Gables.[29][30]

The novel has been popular in Japan, where it is known asRed-haired Anne(赤毛のアン(Akage no An)),[31][32]and where it has been included in the national school curriculum since 1952. 'Anne' is revered as "an icon" in Japan, especially since 1979 when this story was broadcast asanime,Anne of Green Gables. Japanese couples travel to Prince Edward Island to have civil wedding ceremonies on the grounds of the Green Gables farm. Some Japanese girls arrive as tourists with red-dyed hair styled in pigtails, to look like Anne.[33]In 2014, theAsadora'Hanako to Anne', which was aboutHanako Muraoka, the first person to translate Anne into Japanese, was broadcast and Anne became popular among old and young alike.

A replica of the Green Gables house in Cavendish is located in the theme park Canadian World inAshibetsu, Hokkaido, Japan. The park was a less expensive alternative for Japanese tourists instead of traveling to P.E.I. The park hosted performances featuring actresses playing Anne and Diana. The theme park is open during the summer season with free admission, though there are no longer staff or interpreters.[34]

The Avonlea theme park near Cavendish and the Cavendish Figurines shop have trappings so that tourists may dress like the book's characters for photos.[35]Souvenir shops throughout Prince Edward Island offer numerous foods and products based on details of the 'Anne Shirley' novels. Straw hats for girls with sewn-in red braids are common, as are bottles of raspberry cordial soda.[36]

The first filmed appearance of Anne Shirley was in the 1919 silent film,Anne of Green Gables, in which the role was played byMary Miles Minter. The film was directed byWilliam Desmond Taylor. As of 2011, no prints of this silent film adaptation are known to survive. The 1919 film version moved the story from Prince Edward Island to New England, which one American critic—unaware that the novel was set in Canada—praised for "the genuine New England atmosphere called for by the story".[46]Montgomery herself was infuriated with the film for changing Anne from a Canadian to an American, writing in her diary:

Montgomery disapproved of Minter's performance, writing she had portrayed "a sweet, sugary heroine utterly unlike my gingerly Anne", and complained about a scene where Shirley waved about a shotgun as something as her Anne would never do.[47]

In the1934 adaptationof the novel, Anne was portrayed byDawn O'Day, who legally changed her name to "Anne Shirley." She reprised the role inAnne of Windy Poplars, a 1940 film adaptation. Montgomery liked the 1934 film more than the 1919 film, not least because now the book's dialogue could be portrayed on the silver screen and that two scenes were filmed on location in Prince Edward Island (though the rest of the film was shot in California), but still charged that neither the 1919 nor 1934 versions ofAnne of Green Gablesquite got her book right.[48]Writing about the 1934 version ofAnne of Green Gables, Montgomery wrote in her diary that it was a "thousand times" better than the 1919 version, but still it: "was so entirely different frommyvision of the scenes and the people that it did not seem likemybook at all".[47]The British scholarFaye Hammillwrote that 1934 film version stripped Anne of the "Canadian and feminist" aspects that the Anne of the books possessed, stating that there was something about Anne that Hollywood cannot get right.[48]Hammill observed that the idea that Anne was entirely cheerful is a product of the film and television versions as the Anne of the books has to deal with loss, rejection, cruel authority figures, and loneliness.[48]

As one of the most familiar characters in Canadian literature,Anne of Green Gableshas been parodied by several Canadian comedy troupes, includingCODCO(Anne of Green Gut) andThe Frantics(Fran of theFundy).