The narrator is an unnamed elderly lawyer who works with legal documents and has an office on Wall Street in New York. In his employ are twoscriveners, Turkey and Nippers, whose ages are 60 and 25, as well as an errand boy nicknamed Ginger Nut, age 12. He then takes on another scrivener, Bartleby.

At first, Bartleby produces a large volume of high-quality work, but one day, when asked to help proofread a document, Bartleby answers with what soon becomes his perpetual response to every request: "I would prefer not to." To the dismay of the narrator and the irritation of the other employees, Bartleby begins to perform fewer and fewer tasks and eventually none. He instead spends long periods of time staring out one of the office's windows at a brick wall. The narrator makes several attempts to reason with Bartleby or to learn something about him, but never has any success. When the narrator stops by the office one Sunday morning, he discovers that Bartleby is living there. He is saddened by the thought of the life the young man must lead.

Tension builds as business associates wonder why Bartleby is always present in the office, yet does not appear to do any work. Sensing the threat to his reputation, but emotionally unable to evict Bartleby, the narrator moves his business to a different building. The new tenant of his old office comes to ask for help in removing Bartleby, and the narrator tells the man that he is not responsible for his former employee. A week or so after this, several other tenants of the narrator's former office building come to him with their landlord because Bartleby is still making a nuisance of himself; though he has been put out of the office, he sits on the building stairs all day and sleeps in its doorway at night. The narrator agrees to visit Bartleby and attempts to reason with him. He suggests several jobs that Bartleby might try and even invites Bartleby to live with him until they figure out a better solution, but Bartleby declines these offers. The narrator leaves the building and flees the neighborhood for several days, so as not to be bothered by the landlord and tenants.

When the narrator returns to work, he learns that the landlord has called the police. The officers have arrested Bartleby and imprisoned him inthe Tombs, or "the Hall of Justice", as a vagrant. He goes to visit Bartleby, who spurns him, and bribes a cook to make sure Bartleby gets enough food. The narrator returns a few days later to check on Bartleby and discovers him dead ofstarvation, having preferred not to eat.

Months later, the narrator hears a rumor that Bartleby had once worked in adead letter officeand reflects on how this might have affected him. The story ends with the narrator saying, "Ah Bartleby! Ah humanity!"

Melville's major source of inspiration for the story was an advertisement for a new book,The Lawyer's Story, printed in theTribuneand theTimeson February 18, 1853. The book, published anonymously later that year, was written by popular novelist James A. Maitland.[2]This advertisement included the complete first chapter, which started: "In the summer of 1843, having an extraordinary quantity of deeds to copy, I engaged, temporarily, an extra copying clerk, who interested me considerably, in consequence of his modest, quiet, gentlemanly demeanor, and his intense application to his duties." Melville biographerHershel Parkersaid nothing else in the chapter besides this "remarkably evocative sentence" was notable.[3]Critic Andrew Knighton said Melville may have been influenced by an obscure work from 1846, Robert Grant White'sLaw and Laziness: or, Students at Law of Leisure, which features an idle scrivener,[4]while Christopher Sten suggests that Melville found inspiration inRalph Waldo Emerson's essays, particularly "The Transcendentalist", which shows parallels to "Bartleby".[5]

Melville may have written the story as an emotional response to the bad reviews garnered byPierre, his preceding novel.[6]Financial difficulties may also have played a part:Moby-DickandPierresold so poorly that Melville was in debt to his publisherHarper and Brothers.[7]

The story was first published anonymously as "Bartleby, the Scrivener: A Story of Wall-Street" in two installments inPutnam's Monthly Magazine, in November and December 1853.[8]It was included in Melville'sThe Piazza Tales, published by Dix and Edwards in the United States in May 1856 and in Britain in June.[9]

The narrator and the text do not explicitly explain the reason for Bartleby's behavior, leaving it open to interpretation.

A 1978 article inELHposits that Bartleby shows classic symptoms ofdepression, such as his lack of motivation. He is a passive person, and good at the work he agrees to do. He refuses to divulge any personal information to the narrator. Bartleby's death is consistent with depression—having no motivation to survive, he refrains from eating until he dies.[10]

Bartleby has been interpreted as a "psychological double" for the narrator who criticizes the "sterility, impersonality, and mechanical adjustments of the world which the lawyer inhabits."[11]Until the end of the story, Bartleby's background is unknown and may have sprung from the narrator's mind. The narrator screens off Bartleby in a corner, which has been interpreted as symbolizing "the lawyer's compartmentalization of the unconscious forces which Bartleby represents."[11]

PsychoanalystChristopher Bollassays the main focus of the story is the narrator, whose "willingness to tolerate [Bartleby's] work stoppage is what needs to be explained ... As the story proceeds, it becomes increasingly clear that the lawyer identifies with his clerk. To be sure, it is an ambivalent identification, but that only makes it all the more powerful."[12]

Scholars have long explored the possibility that Bartleby serves as an autobiographical portrait.[13]Lawrence Buellsuggested that the scrivener may reflect Melville as disenchanted writer or artist,[14]Leo Marxconnected the story's theme of alienation with Melville's experiences and feelings of isolation,[15]and Giles Gunn posited that Melville's personal struggles and disillusionment with the literary world influenced his portrayal of Bartleby as a withdrawn and passive character.[16]

"Bartleby, the Scrivener" alludes toJonathan Edwards's "Inquiry into the Freedom of the Will" and Jay Leyda, in his introduction toThe Complete Stories of Herman Melville,comments on the similarities between Bartleby andThe Doctrine of Philosophical NecessitybyJoseph Priestley. Both Edwards and Priestley wrote about free will anddeterminism. Edwards states that free will requires the will to be isolated from the moment of decision, in which case Bartleby's isolation from the world would allow him to be completely free. He has the ability to do whatever he pleases. The reference to Priestley and Edwards in connection with determinism may suggest that Bartleby's exceptional exercise of his personal will, though it leads to his death, spares him from an externally determined fate.[17]

"Bartleby" is also seen as an inquiry into ethics. CriticJohn Mattesonsees the story (and other Melville works) as explorations of the changing meaning of 19th-century "prudence". The story's narrator "struggles to decide whether his ethics will be governed by worldly prudence or Christianagape."  He wants to be humane, as shown by his accommodations of the four staff and especially of Bartleby, but this conflicts with the newer, pragmatic and economically based notion of prudence supported by changing legal theory. The 1850 caseBrown v. Kendall, three years before the story's publication, was important in establishing the "reasonable man" standard in the United States, and emphasized the positive action required to avoidnegligence. Bartleby's passivity has no place in a legal and economic system that increasingly sides with the "reasonable" and economically active individual. His fate, an innocent decline into unemployment, prison, and starvation, dramatizes the effect of the new prudence on the economically inactive members of society.[18]

Though no great success at the time of publication, "Bartleby, the Scrivener" is now among the most noted of American short stories.[citation needed]

On November 5, 2019, theBBC Newslisted "Bartleby, the Scrivener" on its list of the100 most influential novels.[19]

In a 2025 "Read Your Way Through New York City" feature forThe New York Times,Hernan Diazcalled it a "quintessential New York book", describing it as a tale of a "unclassifiable weirdo who is always on the verge of being crushed by an ever-expanding city ruled by profit and... the compassionate mensch who tries to come to his aid."[20]