Jarndyce and Jarndyceis an interminableprobate casein theCourt of Chanceryconcerning two or morewillsand their beneficiaries. Lady Honoria Dedlock, the beneficiary of one of the wills, lives with her husband, Sir Leicester Dedlock, at his estate at Chesney Wold. While listening to the reading by Mr Tulkinghorn, the familysolicitor, of an affidavit, Lady Dedlock recognises the handwriting on the copy. The sight affects her so much she almost faints, which Mr Tulkinghorn notices and investigates. He traces the copyist, a pauper known only as "Nemo", inLondon. Nemo has recently died, and the only person to identify him is a street-sweeper, a poor homeless boy named Jo, who lives in a particularly grim and poverty-stricken part of the city known as Tom-All-Alone's.

Esther Summerson is raised by the harsh Miss Barbary, who tells her, "Your mother, Esther, is your disgrace, and you were hers." After Miss Barbary dies, John Jarndyce becomes Esther'sguardianand assigns "Conversation" Kenge, a Chancery lawyer, to take charge of her future. After attending school for six years, Esther moves in with Jarndyce at his home, Bleak House. Jarndyce simultaneously assumes custody of two other wards, his cousins Richard Carstone and Ada Clare. They are beneficiaries in one of the wills at issue inJarndyce and Jarndyce; their guardian is a beneficiary under another will, and the two wills conflict.

Richard and Ada soon fall in love, but though Jarndyce does not oppose the match, he stipulates that Richard must first choose a profession. Richard first tries a career in medicine, and Esther meets Allan Woodcourt, a physician, at the house of Richard's tutor. When Richard mentions the prospect of gaining from the resolution ofJarndyce and Jarndyce, Jarndyce beseeches him never to put faith in what he calls "thefamily curse." Richard decides to change his career to law, then later switches again and spends the remainder of his funds tobuy a commission as a military officer.

Lady Dedlock—disguised as her maid, Mademoiselle Hortense—pays Jo to take her to Nemo's grave. Meanwhile, Mr Tulkinghorn is concerned Lady Dedlock has a secret which could threaten the interests of Sir Leicester and watches her constantly, even enlisting the real Hortense to spy on her. He also enlists Inspector Bucket to run Jo out of town, to eliminate anything that might connect Nemo to the Dedlocks. Esther sees Lady Dedlock at church and later talks with her at Chesney Wold.

Lady Dedlock discovers that Esther is her own child: unknown to Sir Leicester, before she married, Honoria had had a lover, Captain Hawdon (Nemo), and bore a daughter by him, who she had believed was dead. The daughter, Esther, was brought up by Honoria's sister, Miss Barbary. Esther becomes sick (possibly withsmallpox, since it severely disfigures her) from Jo. Lady Dedlock waits until she has recovered before telling her the truth. Though the two women are happy to be reunited, Lady Dedlock tells Esther they must never acknowledge their connection again.

Upon recovery, Esther finds that Richard, having failed at several professions, has ignored Jarndyce's advice and is trying to pushJarndyce and Jarndyceto conclusion in his and Ada's favour, and as a result has fallen out with Jarndyce. In the process, Richard loses all his money and declines in health. He and Ada have secretly married, and Ada is pregnant. Esther has her own romance when Mr Woodcourt returns to England, having survived a shipwreck, and he continues to seek her company despite her disfigurement. However, Esther has already agreed to marry her guardian, the much older Jarndyce.

Hortense and Mr Tulkinghorn discover the truth about Lady Dedlock's past. After a confrontation with Mr Tulkinghorn, Lady Dedlock flees her home, leaving a note apologising to Sir Leicester for her conduct. Mr Tulkinghorn dismisses Hortense, who is no longer of any use to him. He is shot through the heart, and suspicion falls on Lady Dedlock. Sir Leicester, discovering his lawyer's death and his wife's confession and flight, suffers a catastrophicstroke, but he manages to communicate that he forgives his wife and wants her to return.

Inspector Bucket, who has previously investigated several matters related toJarndyce and Jarndyce, accepts Sir Leicester's commission to find Lady Dedlock. He initially suspects her of the murder but is able to clear her of suspicion after discovering Hortense's guilt. He requests Esther's help to find her mother. Lady Dedlock has no way to know of her husband's forgiveness or that she has been cleared of suspicion, and she wanders the country in cold weather before dying at the cemetery of her former lover, Captain Hawdon. Esther and Inspector Bucket find her there.

Progress inJarndyce and Jarndyceseems to take a turn for the better when a later will is found, which revokes all previous wills and leaves the bulk of the estate to Richard and Ada. Jarndyce cancels his engagement to Esther, who becomes engaged to Mr Woodcourt. They go to Chancery to find Richard. On their arrival, they learn that the case ofJarndyce and Jarndyceis finally over, because the costs oflitigationhave entirely consumed the estate. Richard collapses, and blood in his mouth makes it evident he is in the last stages oftuberculosis. He apologises to Jarndyce and dies. Jarndyce takes in Ada and her child, a boy whom she names Richard. Esther and Mr Woodcourt marry and live in aYorkshirehouse which Jarndyce gives to them. The couple later raise two daughters.

Many of the novel's subplots focus on minor characters. One such subplot is the hard life and happy, though difficult, marriage of Caddy Jellyby and Prince Turveydrop. Another plot focuses on George Rouncewell's rediscovery of his family, and his reunion with his mother and brother.

Although not a character,Jarndyce and Jarndyceis a vital part of the novel. It is believed to have been inspired by a number of real-life Chancery cases involving wills, including those ofCharles DayandWilliam Jennens,[8]and ofCharlotte Smith's father-in-law,Richard Smith.[9]

Much criticism ofBleak Housefocuses on its unique narrative structure: it is told both by a third-person omniscient narrator and a first-person narrator (Esther Summerson). The omniscient narrator speaks in the present tense and is a dispassionate observer. Esther Summerson tells her own story in the past tense (like David inDavid Copperfieldor Pip inGreat Expectations), and her narrative voice is characterised by modesty, consciousness of her own limits, and willingness to disclose to us her own thoughts and feelings. These two narrative strands never quite intersect, though they do run in parallel. Nabokov felt that letting Esther tell part of the story was Dickens's "main mistake" in planning the novel.[23]Alex Zwerdling, a scholar from Berkeley, after observing that "critics have not been kind to Esther", nevertheless thought Dickens's use of Esther's narrative "one of the triumphs of his art".[24]

Esther's portion of the narrative is perceived by some scholars[who?]as an interesting case study of the Victorian ideal of feminine modesty. She introduces herself thus: "I have a great deal of difficulty in beginning to write my portion of these pages, for I know I am not clever" (chap. 3). This claim is almost immediately belied by the astute moral judgement and satiric observation that characterise her pages. In the same introductory chapter, she writes: "It seems so curious to me to be obliged to write all this about myself! As if this narrative were the narrative ofmylife! But my little body will soon fall into the background now" (chap. 3). This does not turn out to be true.

For most readers and scholars, the central concern ofBleak Houseis its indictment of the English Chancery court system. Chancery or equity courts were one half of the English civil justice system, existing side-by-side with law courts. Chancery courts heard actions having to do with wills and estates, or with the uses of private property. By the mid-nineteenth century, English law reformers had long criticised the delays of Chancery litigation, and Dickens found the subject a tempting target. He already had taken a shot at law-courts and that side of the legal profession in his 1837 novelThe Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick CluborThe Pickwick Papers. Scholars, such as the English legal historian SirWilliam Searle Holdsworth, in his 1928 series of lectures,[25]have made a plausible case for treating Dickens's novels, andBleak Housein particular, as primary sources illuminating the history of English law.

Dickens said in the preface to the book edition ofBleak Housethat he had "purposely dwelt upon the romantic side of familiar things". And some remarkable things do happen: One character, Krook, smells of brimstone and eventually dies ofspontaneous human combustion. This was highly controversial. The nineteenth century saw the increasing triumph of the scientific worldview. Scientifically inclined writers, as well as physicians and scientists, rejected spontaneous human combustion as legend or superstition. When the instalment ofBleak Housecontaining Krook's demise appeared, the literary criticGeorge Henry Lewesaccused Dickens of "giving currency to a vulgar error".[26]Dickens vigorously defended the reality of spontaneous human combustion and cited many documented cases, as well as his own memories of coroners' inquests that he had attended when he had been a reporter. In the preface of the book edition ofBleak House, Dickens wrote: "I shall not abandon the facts until there shall have been a considerable Spontaneous Combustion of the testimony on which human occurrences are usually received."

George GissingandG. K. Chestertonare among those literary critics and writers who considerBleak Houseto be the best novel that Dickens wrote. As Chesterton put it: "Bleak Houseis not certainly Dickens's best book; but perhaps it is his best novel".Harold Bloom, in his bookThe Western Canon, considersBleak Houseto be Dickens's greatest novel. Daniel Burt, in his bookThe Novel 100: A Ranking of the Greatest Novels of All Time, ranksBleak Housenumber 12.

The house namedBleak HouseinBroadstairsis not the original. Dickens stayed with his family at this house (then called Fort House) for at least one month every summer from 1839 until 1851. However, there is no evidence that it formed the basis of the fictional Bleak House, particularly as it is so far from the location of the fictional house.

The house is on top of the cliff on Fort Road and was renamed Bleak House after his death, in his honour.[citation needed]It is the only four storey grade II listed mansion in Broadstairs.

Dickens locates the fictional Bleak House in St Albans, Hertfordshire, where he wrote some of the book. An 18th-century house in Folly Lane, St Albans, has been identified as a possible inspiration for the titular house in the story since the time of the book's publication and was known as Bleak House for many years.[27]

In the late nineteenth century, actressFanny Janauschekacted in a stage version ofBleak Housein which she played both Lady Dedlock and her maid Hortense.  The two characters never appear on stage at the same time. In 1876 John Pringle Burnett's play,Jofound success in London with his wife,Jennie Leeplaying Jo, thecrossing-sweeper.[28]In 1893,Jane Coombsacted in a version ofBleak House.[29]

A 1901 short film,The Death of Poor Joe, is the oldest known surviving film featuring aCharles Dickenscharacter (Jo inBleak House).[30]

In the silent film era,Bleak Housewas filmedin 1920and 1922. The latter version featuredSybil Thorndikeas Lady Dedlock.[31]

In 1928, a short film made in the UK in thePhonofilmsound-on-film process starredBransby Williamsas Grandfather Smallweed.[32]

In 1998,BBC Radio 4broadcast a radio adaptation of five hour-long episodes, starringMichael Kitchenas John Jarndyce.[33]

TheBBChas produced three television adaptations ofBleak House. The first serial,Bleak House, was broadcast in 1959 in eleven half-hour episodes.[34]The serial survives. The secondBleak House, starringDiana RiggandDenholm Elliott, aired in 1985 as an eight-part series.[35]In 2005, the thirdBleak Housewas broadcast in fifteen episodes starringAnna Maxwell Martin,Gillian Anderson,Denis Lawson,Charles Dance, andCarey Mulligan.[36]It won aPeabody Awardthat same year because it "created 'appointment viewing,' soap-style, for a series that greatly rewarded its many extra viewers."[37]

Charles Jefferyswrote the words for andCharles William Gloverwrote the music for songs called "Ada Clare"[38]and "Farewell to the Old House",[39]which are inspired by the novel.

Anthony Phillipsincluded a piece entitled "Bleak House" on his 1979progressive rockrelease,Sides. The form of the lyrics roughly follows the narrative of Esther Summerson, and is written in her voice.[40]

Like most Dickens novels,Bleak Housewas published in 20 monthly instalments, each containing 32 pages of text and two illustrations byPhiz(the last two being published together as a double issue). Each cost one shilling, except for the final double issue, which cost two shillings.[citation needed]

Charles Dickens,Bleak House, ed.Nicola Bradbury(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1996)