For Cervantes and the readers of his day,Don Quixotewas a one-volume book published in 1605, divided internally into four parts, not the first part of a two-part set. The mention in the 1605 book of further adventures yet to be told was totally conventional, did not indicate any authorial plans for a continuation, and was not taken seriously by the book's first readers.[14]

Cervantes, in ametafictionalnarrative, writes that the first few chapters were taken from "the archives of La Mancha", and the rest were translated from an Arabic text by theMoorishhistorianCide Hamete Benengeli.

Alonso Quixanois ahidalgonearing 50 years of age who lives in a deliberately unspecified region ofLa Manchawith his niece and housekeeper. While he lives a frugal life, he is full of fantasies about chivalry stemming from his obsession with chivalric romance books. Eventually, his obsession becomes madness when he decides to become aknight errant, donning an old suit of armor. He renames himself "Don Quixote", names his old workhorse "Rocinante", and designates Aldonza Lorenzo (a slaughterhouse worker with a famed hand for salting pork) hislady love, renaming herDulcinea del Toboso.

As he travels in search of adventure, he arrives at an inn that he believes to be a castle, calls the prostitutes he meets there "ladies", and demands that the innkeeper, whom he takes to be the lord of the castle, dub him a knight. The innkeeper agrees. Quixote starts the night holdingvigilat the inn's horse trough, which Quixote imagines to be a chapel. He then becomes involved in a fight withmuleteerswho try to remove his armor from the horse trough to water their mules. In a pretend ceremony, the innkeeper dubs him a knight to be rid of him and sends him on his way.

Quixote next encounters a servant named Andres who is tied to a tree and being beaten by his master over disputed wages. Quixote orders the master to stop the beating, untie Andres and swear to treat his servant fairly. However, the beating is resumed, and redoubled, as soon as Quixote leaves.

Quixote then chances upon traders fromToledo. He demands that they agree that Dulcinea del Toboso is the most beautiful woman in the world. One of them demands to see her picture so that he can decide for himself. Enraged, Quixote charges at them but his horse stumbles, causing him to fall. One of the traders beats up Quixote, who is left at the side of the road until a neighboring peasant brings him back home.

While Quixote lies unconscious in his bed, his niece, the housekeeper, the parishcurate, and the local barber burn most of his chivalric and other books, seeing them as the root of his madness. They seal up the library room, later telling Quixote that it was done by a wizard.

Don Quixote asks his neighbour, the poor farm labourerSancho Panza, to be his squire, promising him a petty governorship. Sancho agrees and they sneak away at dawn. Their adventures together begin with Quixote's attack on some windmills which he believes to be ferocious giants. They next encounter two Benedictinefriarsand, nearby, an unrelated lady in a carriage. Quixote takes the friars to be enchanters who are holding the lady captive, knocks one of them from his horse, and is challenged by an armedBasquetravelling with the company. The combat ends with the lady leaving her carriage and begging him not to harm the Basque.

After a friendly encounter with some goatherds and a less friendly one with someYanguesanporters drivingGalician ponies, Quixote and Sancho enter an inn owned by Juan Palomeque, where a mix-up involving a servant girl's romantic rendezvous with another guest results in a brawl. Quixote explains to Sancho that the inn is enchanted. They decide to leave, but Quixote, following the example of the fictional knights, leaves without paying. Sancho ends up wrapped in a blanket and tossed in the air by several mischievous guests at the inn before he manages to follow.

After further adventures involving a dead body, a barber's basin that Quixote imagines as the legendary helmet ofMambrino, and a group ofgalley slaves, they wander into theSierra Morena. There they encounter the dejected and mostly mad Cardenio, who relateshis story. Inspired by Cardenio, Quixote decides to imitate what he has read in his chivalric romances and live like a hermit in a display of devotion to Dulcinea. He sends Sancho to deliver a letter to Dulcinea, but instead Sancho finds the barber and priest from his village. They make a plan to trick Quixote into coming home, recruiting Dorotea, a woman they discover in the forest, to pose as the Princess Micomicona, a damsel in distress.

The plan works and Quixote and the group return to the inn, though Quixote is now convinced, thanks to a lie told by Sancho when asked about the letter, that Dulcinea wants to see him. At the inn, several other plots intersect and are resolved. Meanwhile, a sleepwalking Quixote does battle with somewineskinswhich he takes to be the giant who stole the princess Micomicona's kingdom. An officer of theSanta Hermandadarrives with a warrant for Quixote's arrest for freeing the galley slaves, but the priest begs for the officer to have mercy on account of Quixote's insanity. The officer agrees and Quixote is locked in a cage which he is made to think is an enchantment. He has a learned conversation with a Toledocanonhe encounters by chance on the road, in which the canon expresses his scorn for untruthful chivalric books, but Don Quixote defends them. The group stops to eat and lets Quixote out of the cage; he gets into a fight with a goatherd and with a group of pilgrims, who beat him into submission, before he is finally brought home.

The narrator ends the story by saying that he has found manuscripts of Quixote's further adventures.

Although the two parts are now published as a single work,Don Quixote, Part Twowas a sequel published ten years after the original novel. In an early example ofmetafiction, Part Two indicates that several of its characters have read the first part of the novel and are thus familiar with the history and peculiarities of the two protagonists.

Don Quixote and Sancho are on their way to El Toboso to meet Dulcinea, with Sancho aware that his story about Dulcinea was a complete fabrication. They reach the city at daybreak and decide to enter at nightfall. However, a bad omen frightens Quixote into retreat and they quickly leave. Sancho is instead sent out alone by Quixote to meet Dulcinea and act as a go-between. Sancho's luck brings three peasant girls along the road and he quickly tells Quixote that they are Dulcinea and her ladies-in-waiting and as beautiful as ever. Since Quixote only sees the peasant girls, Sancho goes on to pretend that an enchantment of some sort is at work.

A duke and duchess encounter the duo. These nobles have read Part One of the story and are themselves very fond of books of chivalry. They decide to play along for their own amusement, beginning a string of imagined adventures and practical jokes. As part of one prank, Quixote and Sancho are led to believe that the only way to release Dulcinea from her spell is for Sancho to give himself three thousand three hundred lashes. Sancho naturally resists this course of action, leading to friction with his master. Under the duke's patronage, Sancho eventually gets his promised governorship, though it is false, and he proves to be a wise and practical ruler before all ends in humiliation. Near the end, Don Quixote reluctantly sways towards sanity.

Quixote battles the Knight of the White Moon (a young man from Quixote's hometown who had earlier posed as the Knight of Mirrors) on the beach inBarcelona. Defeated, Quixote submits to prearranged chivalric terms: the vanquished must obey the will of the conqueror. He is ordered to lay down his arms and cease his acts of chivalry for a period of one year, by which time his friends and relatives hope he will be cured.

On the way back home, Quixote and Sancho "resolve" the disenchantment of Dulcinea. Upon returning to his village, Quixote announces his plan to retire to the countryside as a shepherd, but his housekeeper urges him to stay at home. Soon after, he retires to his bed with a deathly illness, and later awakes from a dream, having fully become Alonso Quixano once more. Sancho tries to restore his faith and his interest in Dulcinea, but Quixano only renounces his previous ambition and apologizes for the harm he has caused. He dictates his will, which includes a provision that his niece will be disinherited if she marries a man who reads books of chivalry.

After Quixano dies, the author emphasizes that there are no more adventures to relate and that any further books about Don Quixote would be spurious.

Don Quixote, Part Onecontains a number of stories which do not directly involve the two main characters, but which are narrated by some of thepicaresquefigures encountered by the Don and Sancho during their travels. The longest and best known of these is "El Curioso Impertinente" (The Ill-Advised Curiosity), found in Part One, Book Four. This story, read to a group of travelers at an inn, tells of aFlorentinenobleman, Anselmo, who becomes obsessed with testing his wife's fidelity and talks his close friendLothariointo attempting to seduce her, with disastrous results for all.

InPart Two, the author acknowledges the criticism of his digressions inPart Oneand promises to concentrate the narrative on the central characters (although at one point he laments that his narrative muse has been constrained in this manner). Nevertheless, "Part Two" contains several back narratives related by peripheral characters.

Several abridged editions have been published which delete some or all of the extra tales in order to concentrate on the central narrative.[15]

Thestory within a storyrelates that, for no particular reason, Anselmo decides to test the fidelity of his wife, Camilla, and asks his friend, Lothario, to seduce her. Thinking that to be madness, Lothario reluctantly agrees, and soon reports to Anselmo that Camilla is a faithful wife. Anselmo learns that Lothario has lied and attempted no seduction. He makes Lothario promise to try in earnest and leaves town to make this easier. Lothario tries and Camilla writes letters to her husband telling him of the attempts by Lothario and asking him to return. Anselmo makes no reply and does not return. Lothario then falls in love with Camilla, who eventually reciprocates; an affair between them ensues, but is not disclosed to Anselmo, and their affair continues after Anselmo returns.

One day, Lothario sees a man leaving Camilla's house and jealously presumes she has taken another lover. He tells Anselmo that, at last, he has been successful and arranges a time and place for Anselmo to see the seduction. Before this rendezvous, however, Lothario learns that the man was the lover of Camilla's maid. He and Camilla then contrive to deceive Anselmo further: When Anselmo watches them, she refuses Lothario, protests her love for her husband, and stabs herself lightly in the breast. Anselmo is reassured of her fidelity. The affair restarts with Anselmo none the wiser.

Later, the maid's lover is discovered by Anselmo. Fearing that Anselmo will kill her, the maid says she will tell Anselmo a secret the next day. Anselmo tells Camilla that this is to happen, and Camilla expects that her affair is to be revealed. Lothario and Camilla flee that night. The maid flees the next day. Anselmo searches for them in vain before learning from a stranger of his wife's affair. He starts to write the story, but dies of grief before he can finish. Lothario is killed in battle soon afterward and Camilla dies of grief.

The novel's farcical elements make use of punning and similar verbal playfulness. Character-naming inDon Quixotemakes ample figural use of contradiction, inversion, and irony, such as the namesRocinante[16](a reversal) andDulcinea(an allusion to illusion), and the wordquixoteitself, possibly a pun onquijada(jaw) but certainly[17][18]cuixot(Catalan: thighs), a reference to a horse'srump.[19]

As a military term, the wordquijoterefers tocuisses, part of a full suit ofplate armourprotecting the thighs. The Spanish suffix-otedenotes the augmentative—for example,grandemeans large, butgrandotemeans extra large, with grotesque connotations. Following this example,Quixotewould suggest 'The Great Quijano', an oxymoronic play on words that makes much sense in light of the character's delusions of grandeur.[20]

Cervantes wrote his work inEarly Modern Spanish, heavily borrowing fromOld Spanish, the medieval form of the language. The language ofDon Quixote, although still containingarchaisms, is far more understandable to modern Spanish readers than is, for instance, the completely medieval Spanish of thePoema de mio Cid, a kind of Spanish that is as different from Cervantes' language asMiddle Englishis fromModern English. The Old Castilian language was also used to show the higher class that came with being a knight errant.

InDon Quixote, there are basically two different types of Castilian: Old Castilian is spoken only by Don Quixote, while the rest of the roles speak a contemporary (late 16th century) version of Spanish. The Old Castilian of Don Quixote is a humoristic resource—he copies the language spoken in the chivalric books that drove him to madness; and many times when he talks nobody is able to understand him because his language is too old. This humorous effect is more difficult to see nowadays because the reader must be able to distinguish the two old versions of the language, but when the book was published it was much celebrated. (English translations can get some sense of the effect by having Don Quixote useKing James Bibleor Shakespearean English, or evenMiddle English.)[21][22]

In Old Castilian, the letterxrepresented the sound writtenshin modern English, so the name was originally pronounced[kiˈʃote]. However, as Old Castilian evolved towards modern Spanish, asound changecaused it to be pronounced with avoiceless velar fricative[x]sound (like theScotsorGermanch), and today the Spanish pronunciation of "Quixote" is[kiˈxote]. The original pronunciation is reflected in languages such asAsturian,Leonese,Galician,Catalan,Italian,Portuguese,TurkishandFrench, where it is pronounced with a "sh" or "ch" sound; the French operaDon Quichotteis one of the best-known modern examples of this pronunciation.

Today, English speakers generally attempt something close to the modern Spanish pronunciation ofQuixote(Quijote), as/kiːˈhoʊti/,[1]although the traditional Englishspelling-based pronunciationwith the value of the letter x in modern English is still sometimes used, resulting in/ˈkwɪksət/or/ˈkwɪksoʊt/. InAustralian English, the preferred pronunciation amongst members of the educated classes was/ˈkwɪksət/until well into the 1970s, as part of a tendency for the upper class to "anglicise its borrowing ruthlessly".[23]The traditional English rendering is preserved in the pronunciation of the adjectival formquixotic, i.e.,/kwɪkˈsɒtɪk/,[24][25]defined byMerriam-Websteras the foolishly impractical pursuit of ideals, typically marked by rash and lofty romanticism.[26]

Harold BloomsaysDon Quixoteis the first modern novel, and that the protagonist is at war withFreud'sreality principle, which accepts the necessity of dying. Bloom says that the novel has an endless range of meanings, but that a recurring theme is the human need to withstand suffering.[27]

Edith Grossman, who wrote and published a highly acclaimed[28]English translation of the novel in 2003, says that the book is mostly meant to move people into emotion using a systematic change of course, on the verge of both tragedy and comedy at the same time. Grossman has stated:

The novel's structure isepisodicin form. The full title is indicative of the tale's object, asingenioso(Spanish) means "quick with inventiveness",[30]marking the transition of modern literature fromdramaticto thematic unity. The novel takes place over a long period of time, including many adventures united by common themes of the nature of reality, reading, and dialogue in general.

Althoughburlesqueon the surface, the novel, especially in its second half, has served as an important thematic source not only in literature but also in much of art and music, inspiring works byPablo PicassoandRichard Strauss. The contrasts between the tall, thin, fancy-struck and idealistic Quixote and the fat diddy, world-weary Panza is a motif echoed ever since the book's publication, and Don Quixote's imaginings are the butt of outrageous and cruel practical jokes in the novel.

Even faithful and simple Sancho is forced to deceive him at certain points. The novel is considered a satire oforthodoxy, veracity and even nationalism.[citation needed]In exploring the individualism of his characters, Cervantes helped lead literary practice beyond the narrow convention of thechivalric romance. Hespoofsthe chivalric romance[31]through a straightforward retelling of a series of acts that redound to theknightly virtuesof the hero. The character of Don Quixote became so well known in its time that the wordquixoticwas quickly adopted by many languages. Characters such as Sancho Panza and Don Quixote's steed,Rocinante, are emblems of Western literary culture. The phrase "tilting at windmills" to describe an act of attacking imaginary enemies (or an act of extreme idealism), derives from an iconic scene in the book.

It stands in a unique position between medievalromanceand the modern novel. The former consists of disconnected stories featuring the same characters and settings with little exploration of the inner life of even the main character. The latter are usually focused on the psychological evolution of their characters. In Part I, Quixote imposes himself on his environment. By Part II, people know about him through "having read his adventures", and so, he needs to do less to maintain his image. By his deathbed, he has regained his sanity, and is once more "Alonso Quixano the Good".

The cave ofMedrano[32](also known as thecasa de Medrano) inArgamasilla de Alba, which has been known since the beginning of the 17th century, and according to the tradition of Argamasilla de Alba, was the prison of Miguel de Cervantes and the place where he conceived and began to write his famous work "Don Quixote de la Mancha."[33][34][35][36][37][38][39]

Sources forDon Quixoteinclude the Castilian novelAmadis de Gaula, which had enjoyed great popularity throughout the 16th century. Another prominent source, which Cervantes evidently admires more, isTirant lo Blanch, which the priest describes in Chapter VI ofQuixoteas "the best book in the world." (However, the sense in which it was "best" is much debated among scholars. Since the 19th century, the passage has been called "the most difficult passage ofDon Quixote".) The scene of the book burning provides a list of Cervantes's likes and dislikes about literature.

Cervantes makes a number of references to the Italian poemOrlando furioso. In chapter 10 of the first part of the novel, Don Quixote says he must take the magical helmet ofMambrino, an episode from Canto I ofOrlando, and itself a reference toMatteo Maria Boiardo'sOrlando innamorato.[40]The interpolated story in chapter 33 of Part four of the First Part is a retelling of a tale from Canto 43 ofOrlando, regarding a man who tests the fidelity of his wife.[41]

Another important source appears to have been Apuleius'sThe Golden Ass, one of the earliest known novels, a picaresque from late classical antiquity. The wineskins episode near the end of the interpolated tale "The Curious Impertinent" in chapter 35 of the first part ofDon Quixoteis a clear reference to Apuleius, and recent scholarship suggests that the moral philosophy and the basic trajectory of Apuleius's novel are fundamental to Cervantes' program.[42]Similarly, many of both Sancho's adventures in Part II and proverbs throughout are taken from popular Spanish and Italian folklore.

Cervantes' experiences as agalley slavein Algiers also influencedQuixote.[43]

Medical theories may have also influenced Cervantes' literary process. Cervantes had familial ties to the distinguished medical community. His father, Rodrigo de Cervantes, and his great-grandfather, Juan Díaz de Torreblanca, were surgeons. Additionally, his sister, Andrea de Cervantes, was a nurse.[44]He also befriended many individuals involved in the medical field, in that he knew medical author Francisco Díaz, an expert in urology, and royal doctorAntonio Ponce de Santa Cruzwho served as a personal doctor to both Philip III and Philip IV of Spain.[45]

Apart from the personal relations Cervantes maintained within the medical field, Cervantes' personal life was defined by an interest in medicine. He frequently visited patients from the Hospital de Inocentes in Sevilla.[44]Furthermore, Cervantes explored medicine in his personal library. His library contained more than 200 volumes and included books likeExamen de Ingenios, byJuan HuarteandPractica y teórica de cirugía, by Dionisio Daza Chacón that defined medical literature and medical theories of his time.[45]

Researchers Isabel Sanchez Duque and Francisco Javier Escudero have found that Cervantes was a friend of the family Villaseñor, which was involved in a combat with Francisco de Acuña. Both sides combated disguised as medieval knights in the road fromEl TobosotoMiguel Estebanin 1581. They also found a person called Rodrigo Quijada, who bought the title of nobility of "hidalgo", and created diverse conflicts with the help of a squire.[46][47]

It is not certain when Cervantes began writingPart TwoofDon Quixote, but he had probably not proceeded much further than Chapter LIX by late July 1614. In about September, however, a spurious Part Two, entitledSecond Volume of the Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha: by the Licenciado (doctorate)Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda, ofTordesillas, was published inTarragonaby an unidentifiedAragonesewho was an admirer ofLope de Vega, rival of Cervantes.[48]It was translated intoEnglishby William Augustus Yardley, Esquire in two volumes in 1784.

Some modern scholars suggest that Don Quixote's fictional encounter with Avellaneda's book in Chapter 59 of Part II should not be taken as the date that Cervantes encountered it, which may have been much earlier.

Avellaneda's identity has been the subject of many theories, but there is no consensus as to who he was. In its prologue, the author gratuitously insulted Cervantes, who took offense and responded; the last half of Chapter LIX and most of the following chapters of Cervantes'sSegunda Partelend some insight into the effects upon him; Cervantes manages to work in some subtle digs at Avellaneda's own work, and in his preface to Part II, comes very near to criticizing Avellaneda directly.

In his introduction toThe Portable Cervantes,Samuel Putnam, a noted translator of Cervantes' novel, calls Avellaneda's version "one of the most disgraceful performances in history".[49]

The second part of Cervantes'Don Quixote, finished as a direct result of the Avellaneda book, has come to be regarded by some literary critics[50]as superior to the first part, because of its greater depth of characterization, its discussions, mostly between Quixote and Sancho, on diverse subjects, and its philosophical insights. In Cervantes'sSegunda Parte, Don Quixote visits a printing-house in Barcelona and finds Avellaneda'sSecond Partbeing printed there, in an early example ofmetafiction.[51]Don Quixote and Sancho Panza also meet one of the characters from Avellaneda's book, Don Alvaro Tarfe, and make him swear that the "other" Quixote and Sancho are impostors.[52]

Cervantes' story takes place on the plains ofLa Mancha, specifically thecomarcaofCampo de Montiel.

The location of the village to which Cervantes alludes in the opening sentence ofDon Quixotehas been the subject of debate since its publication over four centuries ago. Indeed, Cervantes deliberately omits the name of the village, giving an explanation in the final chapter: