Emma Woodhouse's friend and former governess, Miss Taylor, has just married Mr. Weston. Having introduced them, Emma takes credit for their marriage and decides that she likesmatchmaking. After returning home to Hartfield, Emma forges ahead with her new interest against the advice of her friend Mr. Knightley, whose brother is married to Emma's elder sister, Isabella. She attempts to match her new friend, Harriet Smith, to Mr. Elton, the localvicar. Emma persuades Harriet to refuse a marriage proposal from Robert Martin, a respectable young farmer, although Harriet likes him. Mr. Elton, a social climber, mistakenly believes Emma is in love with him and proposes to her. When Emma reveals she believed him attached to Harriet, he is outraged, considering Harriet socially inferior. After Emma rejects him, Mr. Elton goes toBathand returns with a pretentious,nouveau-richewife, as Mr. Knightley expected he would do. Harriet is heartbroken, and Emma feels ashamed about misleading her.

Frank Churchill, Mr. Weston's son, arrives for a two-week visit. Frank was adopted by his wealthy and domineering aunt and has had few opportunities to visit before. Mr. Knightley tells Emma that, while Frank is intelligent and engaging, he has a shallow character. Jane Fairfax also arrives to visit her aunt Miss Bates and grandmother Mrs. Bates for a few months before starting a governess position due to financial situation. She is the same age as Emma and has received an excellent education through her father's friend, Colonel Campbell. Emma has remained somewhat aloof from Jane because she envies her and is annoyed by everyone, including Mrs. Weston and Mr. Knightley, praising Jane. Mrs. Elton takes Jane under her wing and announces that she will find a governess post before it is wanted.

Emma decides that Jane and Mr. Dixon, Colonel Campbell's new son-in-law, are mutually attracted, and that is the reason she arrived earlier than expected. She confides this to Frank, who met Jane and the Campbells atWeymouththe previous year; he apparently agrees with Emma. Suspicions are further fuelled when a gifted piano, sent anonymously, arrives for Jane. Emma feels herself falling in love with Frank, but it does not last. The Eltons treat Harriet poorly, culminating in Mr. Elton publicly snubbing Harriet at a ball. Mr. Knightley, who normally refrained from dancing, gallantly asks Harriet to dance. The day after the ball, Frank brings Harriet to Hartfield, as she fainted after a rough encounter with localgypsies. Emma mistakes Harriet's gratitude to Frank as Harriet being in love with him. Meanwhile, Mrs. Weston wonders if Mr. Knightley is attracted to Jane, but Emma dismisses the idea. When Mr. Knightley says he notices a connection between Jane and Frank, Emma disagrees, as Frank appears to be courting her instead. Frank arrives late to a gathering at Donwell, while Jane departs early. The next day atBox Hill, a local scenic spot, Frank and Emma are joking when Emma thoughtlessly insults Miss Bates.

When Mr. Knightley scolds Emma for insulting Miss Bates, she is ashamed. The next day, she visits Miss Bates to atone for her bad behaviour, impressing Mr. Knightley. During the visit, Emma learns that Jane has accepted a governess position from one of Mrs. Elton's friends. Jane becomes ill and refuses to see Emma or receive her gifts. Meanwhile, Frank has been visiting his aunt, who dies soon after his arrival. He and Jane reveal to the Westons that they have been secretly engaged since autumn, but Frank knew his aunt would disapprove of the match. Maintaining the secrecy strained the conscientious Jane and caused the couple to quarrel, with Jane ending the engagement. Frank's easygoing uncle readily gives his blessing to the match. The engagement is made public, leaving Emma annoyed to discover that she had been so wrong.

Emma believes Frank's engagement will devastate Harriet, but instead, Harriet says she loves Mr. Knightley, and though she knows the match is too unequal, Emma's encouragement and Mr. Knightley's kindness have given her hope. Emma is startled and realises that she is also in love with Mr. Knightley. Mr. Knightley returns to console Emma about Frank and Jane's engagement, thinking her heartbroken. When she admits her foolishness, he proposes, and she accepts. Harriet accepts Robert Martin's second proposal, and they are the first couple to marry. Jane and Emma reconcile, and Frank and Jane visit the Westons. Once the mourning period for Frank's aunt ends, they will marry. Before the end of November, Emma and Mr. Knightley are married with the prospect of "perfect happiness."

Emma Woodhouse, the protagonist of the story, is a beautiful, high-spirited, intelligent, and somewhat spoiled young woman from thelanded gentry. She is twenty when the story opens. Her mother died when she was young. She has been mistress of the house (Hartfield) since her older sister got married. Although intelligent, she lacks the discipline to practise or study anything in depth. She is portrayed as compassionate to the poor, but at the same time has a strong sense of class status. Her affection for and patience towards her valetudinarian father are also noteworthy. While she is in many ways mature, Emma makes some serious mistakes, mainly due to her lack of experience and her conviction that she is always right. Although she has vowed she will never marry, she delights in making matches for others. She has a brief flirtation with Frank Churchill; however, she realises at the end of the novel that she loves Mr Knightley.

Mr Knightley, aged 37 years, is Emma's neighbour and close friend. He is her only critic. Mr Knightley owns Donwell Abbey, which includes extensive grounds and farms. He is the elder brother of Mr John Knightley, the husband of Emma's elder sister Isabella. Mr Knightly is considerate, aware of the feelings of the other characters, and always exhibits good behaviour and judgment. Mr Knightley is angry after Emma persuades Harriet to turn down Mr Martin, a farmer on the Donwell estate; he warns Emma against pushing Harriet towards Mr Elton, knowing that Mr Elton seeks to marry for money. He is suspicious of Frank Churchill and his motives; he suspects that Frank has a secret understanding with Jane Fairfax.

Frank Churchill, Mr Weston's son by his first marriage, is an amiable young man, who, at age 23, is liked by almost everyone. Mr Knightley, however, thinks him immature and selfish for failing to visit his father after his father's wedding. After his mother's death, he was raised by his wealthy aunt and uncle, the Churchills, at the family estate of Enscombe in Yorkshire. His uncle was his mother's brother. By his aunt's decree, he assumed the name Churchill on his majority. Frank is given to dancing and living a carefree existence, and is secretly engaged to Miss Fairfax atWeymouth, although he fears his aunt will forbid the match because Jane is not wealthy. He manipulates and plays games with the other characters to ensure his engagement to Jane remains concealed.

Jane Fairfaxis an orphan whose only family is her aunt, Miss Bates, and her grandmother, Mrs Bates. She is a beautiful, bright, and elegant woman, with impeccable manners. She is the same age as Emma. She is well-educated and talented at singing and playing the piano; she is the only person whom Emma envies. Colonel Campbell, an army friend of Jane's father, felt responsible for Jane, and provided her an excellent education while she has shared his home and family since she was nine years old. She has little fortune, however, and is destined to become a governess – an unpleasant prospect. The secret engagement goes against her principles and distresses her greatly.

Harriet Smith, a young friend of Emma, just seventeen when the story opens, is a beautiful but unsophisticated girl. She has been a pupil at a nearby school, where she met the sisters of Mr Martin. As a parlour boarder at the school she now helps supervise younger pupils. Emma takes Harriet under her wing early on, and she becomes the subject of Emma's misguided matchmaking attempts. She is revealed in the last chapter to be the natural daughter of a decent tradesman, although he is not a gentleman. Harriet and Mr Martin are wed. The now wiser Emma approves of the match.

Robert Martinis a well-to-do, 24-year-old tenant farmer who, though not a gentleman, is a friendly, amiable and diligent young man, well esteemed by Mr George Knightley. He becomes acquainted and subsequently smitten with Harriet during her 2-month stay at Abbey Mill Farm, which was arranged at the invitation of his sister, Elizabeth Martin, Harriet's school friend. His first marriage proposal, in a letter, is rejected by Harriet under Emma's direction and influence (an incident which puts Mr Knightley and Emma in a disagreement with one another). Emma had convinced herself that Harriet's class and breeding were above associating with the Martins, much less marrying one. His second marriage proposal is later accepted by a contented Harriet and approved by a wiser Emma; their joining marks the first of the three happy couples to marry in the end.

Reverend Philip Eltonis a good-looking, initially well-mannered, and ambitious young vicar, 27 years old and unmarried when the story opens. He is well aware of his good looks and status, and it is only when he is around men that he shows his true colours and reveals his schemes to marry a wealthy woman. Emma wants him to marry Harriet; however, he aspires to secure Emma's hand in marriage to gain her dowry of £30,000. Mr Elton displays his mercenary nature by quickly marrying another woman of means after Emma rejects him.

Augusta Elton, formerly Miss Hawkins, is Mr Elton's wife. She has 10,000 pounds "or thereabouts" (the vague description of her dowry perhaps suggests she is not as wealthy as she claims), but lacks good manners, committing common vulgarities such as using people's names too intimately (as in "Jane", not "Miss Fairfax"; "Knightley", not "Mr Knightley"). She is a boasting, pretentious woman who expects her due as a new bride in the village. Emma is polite to her but does not like her and the two instantly become passive-aggressive enemies. She patronises Jane, which earns Jane the sympathy of others. Her lack of social graces shows the good breeding of the other characters, particularly Miss Fairfax and Mrs Weston, and shows the difference between gentility and money. Mrs Elton repeatedly makes contradictory and unbelievable declarations about her background, such as exaggerated claims of the similarity between Emma's estate, Hartfield, and her brother-in-law's manor, Maple Grove, revealing her dishonesty and enforcing the idea that she is a schemingparvenutrying her utmost to conceal her lower origins.

Mrs Westonwas Emma's governess for sixteen years as Miss Anne Taylor and remains her closest friend and confidante after she marries Mr Weston. She is a sensible woman who loves Emma. Mrs Weston acts as a surrogate mother to her former charge and, occasionally, as a voice of moderation and reason. The Weston and the Woodhouse families see each other almost daily. Near the end of the story, the Westons' baby Anna is born.

Mr Westonis a widower and a businessman living in Highbury who marries Miss Taylor in his early 40s, after buying a house called Randalls. By his first marriage, he is father to Frank Weston Churchill, who was adopted and raised by his late wife's brother and his wife. He sees his son in London each year. He married his first wife, Miss Churchill, when he was a captain in the militia, posted near her home. Mr Weston is a sanguine, optimistic man, who enjoys socialising, making friends quickly in business and among his neighbours.

Miss Batesis a friendly, garrulous spinster whose mother, Mrs Bates, is a friend of Mr Woodhouse. Her niece is Jane Fairfax, daughter of her late sister. She was raised in better circumstances in her younger days as the vicar's daughter; now she and her mother rent rooms in Highbury. One day, Emma humiliates her on a day out in the country, when she alludes to her tiresome prolixity.

Mr Henry Woodhouse, Emma's father, is always concerned for his health, and to the extent that it does not interfere with his own, the health and comfort of his friends. He is a valetudinarian (i.e., similar to a hypochondriac but more likely to be genuinely ill). He assumes that a great many things are hazardous to his health, especially draughts of wind. Emma gets along with him well, and he loves both his daughters. He laments that "poor Isabella" and especially "poor Miss Taylor" have married and live away from him. He is a fond father and fond grandfather who did not remarry when his wife died; instead he brought in Miss Taylor to educate his daughters and become part of the family. Because he is generous and well-mannered, his neighbours accommodate him when they can.

Isabella Knightley (née Woodhouse)is the elder sister of Emma, by seven years, and daughter of Henry. She is married to John Knightley. She lives in London with her husband and their five children (Henry, 'little' John, Bella, 'little' Emma, and George). She is similar in disposition to her father, and her relationship to Mr Wingfield, (her family's physician) mirrors that of her father's to Mr Perry.

John Knightleyis Isabella's husband and George's younger brother, 31 years old. He is a lawyer (either a barrister or solicitor) by profession. Like the others raised in the area, he is a friend of Jane Fairfax. He greatly enjoys the company of his family, including his brother and his Woodhouse in-laws, but is not a very sociable man. He is forthright with Emma, his sister-in-law.

Mr Perryis the apothecary in Highbury. He is never shown directly speaking but spends a significant amount of time responding to the health issues of Mr Woodhouse. He and Mrs Perry have several children. He is also the subject of a discussion between Miss Bates and Jane Fairfax that is relayed in a letter to Mr Frank Churchill which he inadvertently discloses to Emma, thus risking discovery of his link with Jane Fairfax. He is described as an "...intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visits were one of the comforts of Mr Woodhouse's life.[6]"

Mrs Batesis the widow of the former vicar of Highbury, the mother of Miss Bates and the grandmother of Jane Fairfax. She is old and hard of hearing, but is a frequent companion to Mr Woodhouse when Emma attends social activities without him.

Mr & Mrs Colehave been residents of Highbury for several years, but have recently benefited from a significant increase in their income that has allowed them to expand the size of their house, number of servants and other expenses. Despite their "low origin" in trade, their income and style of living have made them the second most prominent family in Highbury, next to the Woodhouses at Hartfield. They host a dinner party that is a significant plot element.

Mrs Churchillwas the wife of the brother of Mr Weston's first wife. She and her husband, Mr Churchill, live at Enscombe in Yorkshire and raised Mr Weston's son, Mr Frank Churchill after the death of Frank's mother. Although never seen directly, she makes demands on Frank Churchill's time and attention that prevent him from visiting his father. Her potential disapproval is the reason that the engagement between Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax is kept secret. Her death provides the opportunity for the secret to be revealed.

Colonel and Mrs Campbellwere friends of Jane Fairfax's late father. Since Jane was their guest for extended visits, they took over her education in preparation for her working as a governess when she grew up. They provided her every advantage possible, short of adoption, and were very fond of her.

Mrs Goddardis the mistress of a boarding school for girls in which Harriet Smith is one of the pupils. She is also a frequent companion to Mr Woodhouse along with Mrs Bates.

Mr William Larkinsis an employee on the Donwell Abbey estate of Mr Knightley. He frequently visits the Bateses, bringing them gifts, such as apples, from Mr Knightley.

Emmawas written after the publication ofPride and Prejudiceand was submitted to the London publisherJohn Murray IIin the autumn of 1815.  He offered Austen £450 for this plus the copyrights ofMansfield ParkandSense and Sensibility, which she refused.  Instead, she published two thousand copies of the novel at her own expense, retaining the copyright and paying a 10% commission to Murray.  The publication in December 1815 (dated 1816) consisted of a three-volume set induodecimoat the selling price of £1.1s (oneguinea) per set.[7]

Prior to publication, Austen's novels had come to the attention of thePrince Regent, whose librarian at Carlton House, aMr Clarke, showed her around the Library at the Prince Regent's request, and who suggested a dedication to the Prince Regent in a future publication.  This resulted in a dedication ofEmmato the Prince Regent at the time of publication and a dedication copy of the novel sent to Carlton House in December 1815.[8]

In America, copies of this first publication were sold in 1818 for $4 per copy, as well as an American edition published byMathew Careyof Philadelphia in 1816.  The number of copies of this edition are not known.  A later American edition was published in 1833[9]and again in 1838 by Carey, Lea, and Blanchard.[10]A French version was published in 1816 by Arthus Bertrand, publisher for MadameIsabelle De Montolieu.[11]A second French version for the Austrian market was published in 1817 Viennese publisher Schrambl.[12]

Richard BentleyreissuedEmmain 1833, along with Austen's five other novels, in his series of Standard Novels. This issue did not contain the dedication page to the Prince Regent.[13]These editions were frequently reprinted up until 1882 with the final publication of the Steventon Edition.[14]Emmahas remained in continuous publication in English throughout the remainder of the nineteenth century and into the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. In addition to the French translation already mentioned,Emmawas translated into Swedish and German in the nineteenth century and into fifteen other languages in the twentieth century including Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, German and Italian.[15]