The book includes three "stages" of Pip's expectations.

Philip "Pip" Pirrip is a seven-year-old orphan who lives with his hot-tempered older sister and her kindly blacksmith husband Joe Gargery on the coastal marshes ofKent. On Christmas Eve 1812,[14]Pip visits the graves of his parents and siblings. There, he unexpectedly encounters an escaped convict who threatens to kill him if he does not bring back food and tools. Pip steals a file from among Joe's tools and a pie and brandy meant for Christmas dinner, which he delivers to the convict.

That evening, Pip's sister is about to look for the missing pie when soldiers arrive and ask Joe to mend some shackles. Joe and Pip accompany them into the marshes to recapture the convict, who is fighting with another escaped convict. The first convict confesses to stealing food, clearing Pip.[15]

A few years later,Miss Havisham, a wealthy and reclusive spinster who lives in dilapidated Satis House wearing her old wedding dress after having been jilted at the altar, asks Mr Pumblechook, a relative of the Gargerys, to find a boy to visit her. Pip visits Miss Havisham and falls in love with Estella, her adopted daughter. Estella is aloof and hostile to Pip, which Miss Havisham encourages. During one visit, another boy picks a fist fight with Pip, where Pip easily gains the upper hand. Estella watches and allows Pip to kiss her afterwards. Pip visits Miss Havisham regularly until he is old enough to learn a trade.[16]

Joe accompanies Pip during the last visit to Miss Havisham, and she gives Pip money to become an apprentice blacksmith. Joe's surly assistant, Dolge Orlick, is envious of Pip and dislikes Mrs. Joe. Orlick also complains when Joe says he needs to take Pip somewhere midday, thinking this is another sign of favoritism, of which Joe assures him he can quit work for the day. When Pip and Joe are away from the house, Joe's wife is brutally attacked, leaving her unable to speak or do her work. When Pip sees a leg iron, the weapon used in the attack, he becomes worried, believing it was the same leg iron he helped liberate the convict from. Now bedridden, Mrs. Joe cannot be as "rampaging" towards Pip as before the attack. Pip's former schoolmate Biddy joins the household to help with her care.[17]

Four years into Pip's apprenticeship, Mr Jaggers, a lawyer, informs him that he has been provided money from an anonymous patron, allowing him to become a gentleman. Presuming Miss Havisham is his benefactress, Pip visits her before leaving for London.[18]

Pip's first experience with urban England is a shock, for London is not the "soft white city" Pip imagined, but a place of heavy litter and filth. Pip moves intoBarnard's Innwith Herbert Pocket, the son of his tutor, Matthew Pocket, who is Miss Havisham's cousin. Pip realizes Herbert is the boy he fought with years ago. Herbert tells Pip how Miss Havisham was defrauded and deserted by her fiancé. Pip meets fellow pupils, Bentley Drummle, a brute of a man from a wealthy noble family, and Startop, who is a more agreeable colleague. Jaggers disburses the money Pip needs.[19]During a visit, Pip meets Jaggers's housekeeper, Molly, a former convict.

When Joe visits Pip at Barnard's Inn, Pip is ashamed to be seen with him. Joe relays a message from Miss Havisham that Estella will be visiting her. Pip returns there to meet Estella and is encouraged by Miss Havisham, but avoids visiting Joe. He is disquieted to see Orlick now in service to Miss Havisham. He mentions his misgivings to Jaggers, who promises Orlick's dismissal. In London, Pip and Herbert exchange their romantic secrets: Pip adores Estella, and Herbert is engaged to Clara. Pip meets Estella when she is sent toRichmondto be introduced into society.[20]

Pip and Herbert build up debts. Mrs Joe dies and Pip returns to his village for her funeral. Pip's income is fixed at £500 (equivalent to £53,000 in 2023) per annum when he comes of age at 21. With the help of Jaggers' clerk,John Wemmick, Pip plans to help advance Herbert's prospects by anonymously securing him a position with the shipbroker, Clarriker's. Pip takes Estella to Satis House, where she and Miss Havisham quarrel over Estella's coldness. In London, Drummle outrages Pip by proposing a toast to Estella. Later, at an Assembly Ball in Richmond, Pip witnesses Estella meeting Drummle and warns her about him; she replies that she has no qualms about entrapping him.[21]

A week after his 23rd birthday, Pip learns that his benefactor is the convict he encountered in the churchyard, Abel Magwitch. He had beentransportedtoNew South Walesafter being captured. He has become wealthy after gaining his freedom there, but he cannot return to England on pain of death. However, he returns to see Pip, who was the motivation for all his success.

A shocked Pip stops taking Magwitch's money, but devises a plan with Herbert to help him escape from England.[22]Magwitch shares his past with Pip, and reveals that the escaped convict whom he fought in the churchyard wasCompeyson, the fraudster who had deserted Miss Havisham.[23]

Pip returns to Satis House to visit Estella and meets Drummle, who has also come to see her and now has Orlick as his servant. Pip confronts Miss Havisham for misleading him about his benefactor, but she says she did it to annoy her relatives. Pip declares his love to Estella, who coldly tells him she plans to marry Drummle. A heartbroken Pip returns to London, where Wemmick warns him that Compeyson is looking for him.[24]

At Jaggers's house at dinner, Wemmick tells Pip how Jaggers acquired his maidservant, Molly, rescuing her from the gallows when she was accused of murder.[25]A remorseful Miss Havisham tells Pip how she raised Estella to be unfeeling and heartless ever since Jaggers brought her in as an infant with no information on her parentage. She also tells Pip that Estella is now married. She gives Pip money to pay for Herbert's position at Clarriker's and asks for his forgiveness. As Pip is about to leave, Miss Havisham's dress catches fire, and Pip injures himself in an unsuccessful attempt to save her. Realising that Estella is the daughter of Molly and Magwitch, Pip is discouraged by Jaggers from acting on his suspicions.[26]

A few days before Magwitch's planned escape, Pip is tricked by an anonymous letter into going to a sluice-house near his old home, where he is seized by Orlick, who intends to murder him and freely admits to injuring Pip's sister. As Pip is about to be struck with a hammer, Herbert and Startop arrive and save him. The three pick up Magwitch to row him to the steamboat for Hamburg, but they are met by a police boat carrying Compeyson, who has offered to identify Magwitch. Magwitch seizes Compeyson, and they fight in the river. Seriously injured, Magwitch is taken by the police. Compeyson's body is found later.[27]

Aware that Magwitch's fortune will go to the Crown after his trial, Pip visits a dying Magwitch in the prison hospital and tells him that his daughter Estella is alive. Herbert, who is preparing to move toCairo, Egypt, to manage Clarriker's office, offers Pip a position there. After Herbert's departure, Pip falls ill in his room and faces arrest for debt. However, Joe nurses Pip back to health and pays off the debt. After recovering, Pip then returns to propose to Biddy, only to find that she has married Joe. Pip apologises to Joe, vows to repay him, and leaves for Cairo. There, he moves in with Herbert and Clara, eventually advancing to become third in the company. Only then does Herbert learn that Pip paid for his position in the firm.[28]

After working for eleven years in Egypt, Pip returns to England and visits Joe, Biddy, and their son, Pip Jr. Then, in the ruins of Satis House, he meets the widowed Estella, who asks Pip to forgive her, assuring him that her misfortune and her abusive marriage to Drummle until his death have opened her heart. As Pip takes Estella's hand, and they leave the moonlit ruins, he sees "no shadow of another parting from her".[29]

As Dickens began writingGreat Expectations, he undertook a series of hugely popular and remunerative reading tours. His domestic life had, however, disintegrated in the late 1850s and he had separated from his wife,Catherine Dickens, and was having a secret affair with the much youngerEllen Ternan. It has been suggested that the icy teasing of the character Estella is based on Ellen Ternan's reluctance to become Dickens's mistress.[31]

In hisBook of Memoranda, begun in 1855, Dickens wrote names for possible characters: Magwitch, Provis, Clarriker, Compey, Pumblechook, Orlick, Gargery, Wopsle, Skiffins, some of which became familiar inGreat Expectations. There is also a reference to a "knowing man", a possible sketch of Bentley Drummle.[32]Another evokes a house full of "Toadies and Humbugs", foreshadowing the visitors to Satis House in chapter 11.[32][33]Margaret Cardwelldiscovered the "premonition" ofGreat Expectationsfrom a 25 September 1855letter from Dickensto W. H. Wills, in which Dickens speaks of recycling an "odd idea" from the Christmas special "A House to Let" and "the pivot round which my next book shall revolve".[34][35]The "odd idea" concerns an individual who "retires to an old lonely house…resolved to shut out the world and hold no communion with it".[34]

In an 8 August 1860 letter toThomas Carlyle, Dickens reported his agitation whenever he prepared a new book.[32]A month later, in a letter toJohn Forster, Dickens announced that he just had a new idea.[36]

Dickens was pleased with the idea, calling it "such a very fine, new and grotesque idea" in a letter to Forster.[11]He planned to write "a little piece", a "grotesque tragi-comic conception", about a young hero who befriends an escaped convict, who then makes a fortune in Australia and anonymously bequeaths his property to the hero. In the end, the hero loses the money because it is forfeited to the Crown. In his biography of Dickens, Forster wrote that in the early idea "was the germ of Pip and Magwitch, which at first he intended to make the groundwork of a tale in the old twenty-number form".[37]Dickens presented the relationship between Pip and Magwitch pivotal toGreat Expectationsbut without Miss Havisham, Estella, or other characters he later created.

As the idea and Dickens's ambition grew, he began writing. However, in September, the weeklyAll the Year Roundsaw its sales fall, and its flagship publication,A Day's RidebyCharles Lever, lost favour with the public. Dickens "called a council of war", and believed that to save the situation, "the one thing to be done was for [him] to strike in".[38]The "very fine, new and grotesque idea" became the magazine's new support: weeklies, five hundred pages, just over one year (1860–1861), thirty-six episodes, starting 1 December. The magazine continued to publish Lever's novel until its completion on 23 March 1861,[39]but it became secondary toGreat Expectations. Immediately, sales resumed, and critics responded positively, as exemplified byThe Times's praise: "Great Expectationsis not, indeed, [Dickens's] best work, but it is to be ranked among his happiest".[40]

Dickens, whose health was not the best, felt "The planning from week to week was unimaginably difficult" but persevered.[39]He thought he had found "a good name", decided to use the first person "throughout", and thought the beginning was "excessively droll": "I have put a child and a good-natured foolish man, in relations that seem to me very funny".[41]Four weekly episodes were "ground off the wheel" in October 1860,[42]and apart from one reference to the "bondage" of his heavy task,[43]the months passed without the anguished cries that usually accompanied the writing of his novels.[39]He did not even use theNumber PlansorMems;[N 2]he had only a few notes on the characters' ages, the tide ranges for chapter 54, and the draft of an ending. In late December, Dickens wrote toMary Boylethat "Great Expectations[is] a very great success and universally liked".[10]

Dickens gave six readings from 14 March to 18 April 1861, and in May, Dickens took a few days' holiday inDover. On the eve of his departure, he took some friends and family members for a trip by boat fromBlackwalltoSouthend-on-Sea. Ostensibly for pleasure, the mini-cruise was actually a working session for Dickens to examine banks of the river in preparation for the chapter devoted to Magwitch's attempt to escape.[37]Dickens then revised Herbert Pocket's appearance, no doubt, asserts Margaret Cardwell, to look more like his sonCharley.[44]On 11 June 1861, Dickens wrote to Macready thatGreat Expectationshad been completed and on 15 June, asked the editor to prepare the novel for publication.[39]

Following comments byEdward Bulwer-Lyttonthat the ending was too sad, Dickens rewrote it prior to publication. The ending set aside by Dickens has Pip, who is still single, briefly see Estella in London; after becoming Bentley Drummle's widow, she has remarried.[39][45]It appealed to Dickens due to its originality: "[the] winding up will be away from all such things as they conventionally go".[39][46]Dickens revised the ending for publication so that Pip meets Estella in the ruins of Satis House, she is a widow and he is single. His changes at the conclusion of the novel did not quite end either with the final weekly part or the first bound edition, because Dickens further changed the last sentence in the amended 1868 version from "I could see the shadow of no parting from her"[39]to "I saw no shadow of another parting from her".[47]As Pip useslitotes, "no shadow of another parting", it is ambiguous whether Pip and Estella marry or Pip remains single.Angus Calder, writing for an edition in thePenguin English Library, believed the less definite phrasing of the amended 1868 version perhaps hinted at a buried meaning: 'at this happy moment, I did not see the shadow of our subsequent parting looming over us.'[48]

In a letter to Forster, Dickens explained his decision to alter the draft ending: "You will be surprised to hear that I have changed the end ofGreat Expectationsfrom and after Pip's return to Joe's ... Bulwer, who has been, as I think you know, extraordinarily taken with the book, strongly urged it upon me, after reading the proofs, and supported his views with such good reasons that I have resolved to make the change. I have put in as pretty a little piece of writing as I could, and I have no doubt the story will be more acceptable through the alteration".[49][50]

This discussion between Dickens, Bulwer-Lytton and Forster has provided the basis for much discussion on Dickens's underlying views for this famous novel. Earle Davis, in his 1963 study of Dickens, wrote that "it would be an inadequate moral point to deny Pip any reward after he had shown a growth of character," and that "Eleven years might change Estella too".[51]John Forster felt that the original ending was "more consistent" and "more natural"[52][53]but noted the new ending's popularity.[54]George Gissingcalled that revision "a strange thing, indeed, to befall Dickens" and felt thatGreat Expectationswould have been perfect had Dickens not altered the ending in deference to Bulwer-Lytton.[N 3][55]

In contrast, John Hillis-Miller stated that Dickens's personality was so assertive that Bulwer-Lytton had little influence, and welcomed the revision: "The mists of infatuation have cleared away, [Estella and Pip] can be joined".[56]Earl Davis notes that G. B. Shaw published the novel in 1937 forThe Limited Editions Clubwith the first ending and thatThe Rinehart Editionof 1979 presents both endings.[54][57][58]

George Orwellwrote, "Psychologically the latter part ofGreat Expectationsis about the best thing Dickens ever did," but, like John Forster and several early 20th century writers, includingGeorge Bernard Shaw, felt that the original ending was more consistent with the draft, as well as the natural working out of the tale.[59]Modern literary criticism is split over the matter.

Dickens andWillsco-ownedAll the Year Round, one 75%, the other 25%. Since Dickens was his own publisher, he did not require a contract for his own works.[60]Although intended for weekly publication,Great Expectationswas divided into nine monthly sections, with new pagination for each.[53]Harper's Weeklypublished the novel from 24 November 1860 to 5 August 1861 in the US andAll the Year Roundpublished it from 1 December 1860 to 3 August 1861 in the UK.Harper'spaid £1,000 (equivalent to £119,000 in 2023) for publication rights. Dickens welcomed a contract withTauchnitz4 January 1861 for publication in English for the European continent.

Publications inHarper's Weeklywere accompanied by forty illustrations by John McLenan;[61]however, this is the only Dickens work published inAll the Year Roundwithout illustrations.

Robert L Patten identifies four American editions in 1861 and sees the proliferation of publications in Europe and across the Atlantic as "extraordinary testimony" toGreat Expectations's popularity.[62]Chapman and Hall published the first edition in three volumes in 1861,[2][3][4]five subsequent reprints between 6 July and 30 October, and a one-volume edition in 1862. The "bargain" edition was published in 1862, the Library Edition in 1864, and the Charles Dickens edition in 1868. To this list, Paul Schlicke adds "two meticulous scholarly editions", one Clarendon Press published in 1993 with an introduction by Margaret Cardwell[63]and another with an introduction by Edgar Rosenberg, published by Norton in 1999.[53]The novel was published with one ending (visible in the four online editions listed in the External links at the end of this article). In some 20th century editions, the novel ends as originally published in 1867, and in an afterword, the ending Dickens did not publish, along with a brief story of how a friend persuaded him to a happier ending for Pip, is presented to the reader (for example, 1987 audio edition by Recorded Books[64]).

In 1862, Marcus Stone,[65]son of Dickens's old friend, the painter Frank Stone, was invited to create eight woodcuts for the Library Edition. According to Paul Schlicke, these illustrations are mediocre yet were included in the Charles Dickens edition, and Stone created illustrations for Dickens's subsequent novel,Our Mutual Friend.[53]Later, Henry Mathew Brock also illustratedGreat Expectationsand a 1935 edition ofA Christmas Carol,[66]along with other artists, such as John McLenan,[67]F. A. Fraser,[68]and Harry Furniss.[69]

Robert L. Patten estimates thatAll the Year Roundsold 100,000 copies ofGreat Expectationseach week, and Mudie, the largest circulating library, which purchased about 1,400 copies, stated that at least 30 people read each copy.[70]Aside from the dramatic plot, the Dickensian humour also appealed to readers. Dickens wrote to Forster in October 1860 that "You will not have to complain of the want of humour as in theTale of Two Cities,"[71]an opinion Forster supports, finding that "Dickens's humour, not less than his creative power, was at its best in this book".[37][72]Moreover, according to Paul Schlicke, readers found the best of Dickens's older and newer writing styles.[6]

Overall,Great Expectationswas widely praised,[6]although not all reviews were favourable, however;Margaret Oliphant's review, published May 1862 inBlackwood's Magazine, vilified the novel. Critics in the 19th and 20th centuries hailed it as one of Dickens's greatest successes although often for conflicting reasons: G. K. Chesterton admired the novel's optimism; Edmund Wilson its pessimism; Humphry House in 1941 emphasized its social context. In 1974, Jerome H. Buckley saw it as aBildungsroman, writing a chapter on Dickens and two of his major protagonists (David CopperfieldandPip) in his 1974 book on the Bildungsroman in Victorian writing.[73]John Hillis Miller wrote in 1958 that Pip is the archetype of all Dickensian heroes.[7]In 1970,Q. D. Leavissuggested "How We Must ReadGreat Expectations".[74]In 1984, Peter Brooks, in the wake ofJacques Derrida, offered a deconstructionist reading.[75]The most profound analyst, according to Paul Schlicke, is probablyJulian Moynahan, who, in a 1964 essay surveying the hero's guilt, made Orlick "Pip's double, alter ego and dark mirror image". Schlicke also names Anny Sadrin's extensive 1988 study as the "most distinguished".[76]

In 2015, theBBCpolled book critics outside the UK about novels by British authors; they rankedGreat Expectationsfourth on the list of the 100 Greatest British Novels.[12]Earlier, in its 2003 pollThe Big Readconcerning the reading taste of the British public,Great Expectationswas voted 17th out of the top 100 novels chosen by survey participants.[13]

Great Expectations's single most obvious literary predecessor is Dickens's earlier first-person protagonist-narratedDavid Copperfield. The two novels trace the psychological and moral development of a young boy to maturity, his transition from a rural environment to the London metropolis, the vicissitudes of his emotional development, and the exhibition of his hopes and youthful dreams and their metamorphosis, through a rich and complex first person narrative.[77]Dickens was conscious of this similarity and, before undertaking his new manuscript, rereadDavid Copperfieldto avoid repetition.[41]

The two books both detail homecoming. AlthoughDavid Copperfieldis based on some of Dickens's personal experiences,Great Expectationsprovides, according to Paul Schlicke, "the more spiritual and intimate autobiography".[78]Details of where the novel is set are not given, but according toJohn Forster, Dickens based Satis House onRestoration House, which was near to where he lived inRochester, Kent.[79]"Satis House" was the house where Rochester MP, SirRichard Watts, entertainedQueen Elizabeth I.[80]Furthermore, no a specific time period is given, but it is indicated in general terms by reference older coaches, the title "His Majesty" in reference toGeorge III(1738 – 1820), and to the oldLondon Bridgethat existed prior to the 1824–1831 reconstruction.[81]

The theme of homecoming reflects events in Dickens's life, several years prior to the publication ofGreat Expectations. In 1856, he boughtGad's Hill PlaceinHigham, Kent, which he had dreamed of living in as a child, and moved there from faraway London two years later. In 1858, in a painful marriage breakdown, he separated from Catherine Dickens, his wife of twenty-three years. The separation alienated him from some of his closest friends, such asMark Lemon. He quarrelled withBradbury and Evans, who had published his novels for fifteen years. In early September 1860, in a field behind Gad's Hill, Dickens burned almost all of his correspondence, sparing only letters on business matters.[82][83]He stopped publishing the weeklyHousehold Wordsat the summit of its popularity and replaced it withAll the Year Round.[78]

The Uncommercial Traveller, short stories, and other texts Dickens began publishing in his new weekly in 1859 reflect his nostalgia, as seen in "Dullborough Town" and "Nurses' Stories". According to Paul Schlicke, "it is hardly surprising that the novel Dickens wrote at this time was a return to roots, set in the part of England in which he grew up, and in which he had recently resettled".[78]

Margaret Cardwell draws attention to Chops the Dwarf from Dickens's 1858 Christmas story "Going into Society", who, as the future Pip does, entertains the illusion of inheriting a fortune and becomes disappointed upon achieving his social ambitions.[84]In another vein, Harry Stone thinks that Gothic and magical aspects ofGreat Expectationswere partly inspired byCharles Mathews'sAt Home, which was presented in detail inHousehold Wordsand its monthly supplementHousehold Narrative. Stone also asserts thatThe Lazy Tour of Two Idle Apprentices, written in collaboration with Wilkie Collins after their walking tour ofCumberlandduring September 1857 and published inHousehold Wordsfrom 3 to 31 October of the same year, presents certain strange locations and a passionate love, foreshadowingGreat Expectations.[85]

Beyond its biographical and literary aspects,Great Expectationsappears, according to Robin Gilmour, as "a representative fable of the age".[86]Dickens was aware that the novel "speaks" to a generation applying, at most, the principle of "self help" which was believed to have increased the order of daily life. That the hero Pip aspires to improve, not through snobbery, but through theVictorianconviction of education, social refinement, and materialism, was seen as a noble and worthy goal. However, by tracing the origins of Pip's "great expectations" to crime, deceit and even banishment to the colonies, Dickens unfavourably compares the new generation to the previous one of Joe Gargery, which Dickens portrays as less sophisticated but especially rooted in sound values, presenting an oblique criticism of his time.[86]

The narrative structure ofGreat Expectationsis influenced by the fact that it was first published as weekly episodes in a periodical. This required short chapters, centred on a single subject, and an almost mathematical structure.[87]

Pip's story is told in three stages: his childhood and early youth in Kent, where he dreams of rising above his humble station; his time in London after receiving "great expectations"; and then finally his disillusionment on discovering the source of his fortune, followed by his slow realisation of the vanity of his false values.[88]These three stages are further divided into twelve parts of equal length. This symmetry contributes to the impression of completion, which has often been commented on. George Gissing, for example, when comparing Joe Gargery and Dan'l Peggotty (fromDavid Copperfield), preferred the former, because he is a stronger character, who lives "in a world, not ofmelodrama, but of everyday cause and effect".[89]G. B. Shaw also commented on the novel's structure, describing it as "compactly perfect", andAlgernon Swinburnestated, "The defects in it are as nearly imperceptible as spots on the sun or shadow on a sunlit sea".[90][91]A contributing factor is "the briskness of the narrative tone".[92]

Further, beyond the chronological sequences and the weaving of several storylines into a tight plot, the sentimental setting and morality of the characters also create a pattern.[93]The narrative structure ofGreat Expectationshas two main elements: firstly that of "foster parents", Miss Havisham, Magwitch, and Joe, and secondly that of "young people", Estella, Pip and Biddy. There is a further organizing element that can be labelled "Dangerous Lovers", which includes Compeyson, Bentley Drummle and Orlick. Pip is the centre of this web of love, rejection and hatred. Dickens contrasts this "dangerous love" with the relationship of Biddy and Joe, which grows from friendship to marriage.

This is "the general frame of the novel". The term "love" is generic, applying it to both Pip's true love for Estella and the feelings Estella has for Drummle, which are based on a desire for social advancement. Similarly, Estella rejects Magwitch because of her contempt for everything that appears below what she believes to be her social status.[94]

Great Expectationshas an unhappy ending, since most characters suffer physically, psychologically or both, or die—often violently—while suffering. Happy resolutions remain elusive, while hate thrives. The only happy ending is Biddy and Joe's marriage and the birth of their two children, since the final reconciliations, except that between Pip and Magwitch, do not alter the general order. Though Pip extirpates the web of hatred, the first unpublished ending denies him happiness while Dickens's revised second ending, in the published novel, leaves his future uncertain.[95]

Julian Moynahan argues that the reader can better understand Pip's personality through analysing his relationship with Orlick, the criminal laborer who works at Joe Gargery's forge, than by looking at his relationship with Magwitch.[96]

Following Moynahan,David Trotter[97]notes that Orlick is Pip's shadow. Co-workers in the forge, both find themselves at Miss Havisham's, where Pip enters and joins the company, while Orlick, attending the door, stays out. Pip considers Biddy a sister; Orlick has other plans for her; Pip is connected to Magwitch, Orlick to Magwitch's nemesis, Compeyson. Orlick also aspires to "great expectations" and resents Pip's ascension from the forge and the swamp to the glamour of Satis House, from which Orlick is excluded, along with London's dazzling society. Orlick is the cumbersome shadow Pip cannot remove.[97]

Then comes Pip's punishment, with Orlick's savage attack on Mrs Gargery. Thereafter Orlick vanishes, only to reappear in chapter 53 in a symbolic act, when he lures Pip into a locked, abandoned building in the marshes. Orlick has a score to settle before going on to the ultimate act, murder. However, Pip hampers Orlick, because of his privileged status, while Orlick remains a slave of his condition, solely responsible for Mrs Gargery's fate.[97][98]

Dickens also uses Pip's upper class counterpart, Bentley Drummle, "the double of a double", according to Trotter, in a similar way.[98]Like Orlick, Drummle is powerful, swarthy, unintelligible, hot-blooded, and lounges and lurks, biding his time. Estella rejects Pip for this rude, uncouth but well-born man, and ends Pip's hope. Finally the lives of both Orlick and Drummle end violently.[98]

Although the novel is written in first person, the reader knows—as an essential prerequisite—thatGreat Expectationsis not an autobiography but a novel, a work of fiction with plot and characters, featuring a narrator-protagonist. In addition, Sylvère Monod notes that the treatment of the autobiography differs fromDavid Copperfield, asGreat Expectationsdoes not draw from events in Dickens's life; "at most some traces of a broad psychological and moral introspection can be found".[99]

However, according to Paul Pickerel's analysis, Pip—as both narrator and protagonist—recounts with hindsight the story of the young boy he was, who did not know the world beyond a narrow geographic and familial environment. The novel's direction emerges from the confrontation between the two periods of time. At first, the novel presents a mistreated orphan, repeating situations fromOliver TwistandDavid Copperfield, but the trope is quickly overtaken. The theme manifests itself when Pip discovers the existence of a world beyond the marsh, the forge and the future Joe envisioned for him, the decisive moment when Miss Havisham and Estella enter his life.[100]This is a red herring, as the decay of Satis House and the strange lady within signals the fragility of an impasse. At this point, the reader knows more than the protagonist, creatingdramatic ironythat confers a superiority that the narrator shares.[101]

It is not until Magwitch's return, a plot twist that unites loosely connected plot elements and sets them into motion, that the protagonist's point of view joins those of the narrator and the reader.[102]In this context of progressive revelation, the sensational events at the novel's end serve to test the protagonist's point of view. Thus proceeds, in the words of A. E. Dyson, "The Immolations of Pip".[103]

Some of the narrative devices that Dickens uses arecaricature, comic speech mannerisms, intrigue,Gothicatmosphere, and a central character who gradually changes. Earl Davis notes the close network of the structure and balance of contrasts, and praises the first-person narration for providing a simplicity that is appropriate for the story while avoidingmelodrama. Davis sees the symbolism attached to "great expectations"[vague]as reinforcing the novel's impact.[104]

Characters then become themes in themselves, almost aWagnerianleitmotiv, whose attitudes are repeated at each of their appearances as a musical phrase signaling their entry.[105]For example, Jaggers constantly chews the same fingernail and washes his hands with scented soap, Orlick lurches his huge body, and Matthew Pocket always pulls at his hair. Seen by the narrator, their attitude is mechanical, like that of an automaton: in the general scheme, the gesture betrays the uneasiness of the unaccomplished or exasperated man, his betrayed hope, his unsatisfied life.[105]In this set, every character is orbited by "satellite" characters. Wemmick is Jaggers's copy at work, but has placed in Walworth a secret garden, a castle with a family of an elderly father and a middle-aged fiancée, where he happily devours buttered bread.[106]Wopsle plays the role of a poor Pip, kind of unsuccessful, but with his distraction, finally playsHamletin London, and Pumblechook does not hesitate to be the instrument of Pip's fortunes, then the mentor of his resurrection.[107]

For Pip's redemption to be credible, Trotter writes, the words of the main character must sound right.[108]Christopher Ricks adds that Pip's frankness induces empathy, dramatics are avoided,[109]and his good actions are more eloquent than words. Dickens's subtle narrative technique is also shown when he has Pip confess that he arranged Herbert's partnership with Clarriker, has Miss Havisham finally see the true character of her cousin Matthew Pocket, and has Pocket refuse the money she offers him.[110]To this end, the narrative method subtly changes until, during the perilous journey down the Thames to remove Magwitch in chapter 54, the narrative point-of-view shifts from first person to the omniscient point of view. For the first time, Ricks writes, the "I" ceases to be Pip's thoughts and switches to the other characters, the focus, at once, turns outward, and this is mirrored in the imagery of the black waters tormented waves and eddies, which heaves with an anguish that encompasses the entire universe, the passengers, the docks, the river, the night.[110]

According to Paul Davis, while more realistic than itsautobiographical predecessorwritten when novels likeGeorge Eliot'sAdam Bedewere in vogue,Great Expectationsis in many ways a poetic work built around recurring symbolic images: the desolation of the marshes; the twilight; the chains of the house, the past, the painful memory; the fire; the hands that manipulate and control; the distant stars of desire; the river connecting past, present and future.[111]

Great Expectationscontains a variety of literary genres, including the bildungsroman, gothic novel, crime novel, as well as comedy,melodramaand satire; and it belongs—likeWuthering Heightsand the novels ofWalter Scott—to the romance rather thanrealisttradition of the novel.[112]

Complex and multifaceted,Great Expectationsis a Victorianbildungsroman, or initiatory tale, which focuses on a protagonist who matures over the course of the novel.Great Expectationsdescribes Pip's initial frustration upon leaving home, followed by a long and difficult period that is punctuated with conflicts between his desires and the values of established order. During this time he re-evaluates his life and re-enters society on new foundations.[81]

However, the novel differs from the two preceding pseudo-autobiographies,David CopperfieldandBleak House(1852), (though the latter is only partially narrated in first-person), in that it also partakes of several sub-genres popular in Dickens's time.[113][81]

Great Expectationscontains many comic scenes and eccentric personalities, integral parts to both the plot and the theme. Among the notable comic episodes are Pip's Christmas dinner in chapter 4, Wopsle'sHamletperformance in chapter 31, and Wemmick's marriage in chapter 55. Many of the characters have eccentricities: Jaggers with his punctilious lawyerly ways; the contrariness of his clerk, Wemmick, at work advising Pip to invest in "portable property", while in private living in a cottage converted into a castle; and the reclusive Miss Havisham in her decaying mansion, wearing her tattered bridal robes.[114]

Great Expectationsincorporates elements of the new genre ofcrime fiction, which Dickens had already used inOliver Twist(1837), and which was being developed by his friendsWilkie CollinsandWilliam Harrison Ainsworth. With its scenes of convicts,prison ships, and episodes of bloody violence, Dickens creates characters worthy of theNewgate school of fiction.[115]

Great Expectationscontains elements of theGothic genre, especially Miss Havisham, the bride frozen in time, and the ruined Satis House filled with weeds and spiders.[81]Other characters linked to this genre include the aristocratic Bentley Drummle, because of his extreme cruelty; Pip himself, who spends his youth chasing a frozen beauty; the monstrous Orlick, who systematically attempts to murder his employers. Then there is the fight to the death between Compeyson and Magwitch, and the fire that ends up killing Miss Havisham, scenes dominated by horror, suspense, and the sensational.[113]

Elements of thesilver-fork novelare found in the character of Miss Havisham and her world, as well as Pip's illusions. This genre, which flourished in the 1820s and 1830s,[116]presents the flashy elegance and aesthetic frivolities found in high society. In some respects, Dickens conceivedGreat Expectationsas an anti silver fork novel, attackingCharles Lever's novelA Day's Ride, publication of which began January 1860, inHousehold Words.[81][117]This can be seen in the way that Dickens satirises the pretensions and morals of Miss Havisham and her sycophants, including the Pockets (except Matthew), and Uncle Pumblechook.[81]

ThoughGreat Expectationsis not obviously a historical novel, Dickens does emphasise differences between the time that the novel is set (c.1812–46) and when it was written (1860–1).

Great Expectationsbegins around 1812 (the year of Dickens's birth), continues until around 1830–1835, and then jumps to around 1840–1845, during which theGreat Western Railwaywas built.[81]Though readers today will not notice this, Dickens uses various things to emphasise the differences between 1861 and this earlier period. Among these details—that contemporary readers would have recognised—are the one pound note (in chapter 10) that theBank Notes Act 1826had removed from circulation;[118]likewise, the death penalty for deported felons who returned to Britain was abolished in 1835. Thegallowserected in the swamps, designed to display a rotting corpse, had disappeared by 1832, andGeorge III, the monarch mentioned at the beginning, died in 1820, when Pip would have been seven or eight.

Miss Havisham paid Joe 25 guineas, gold coins, when Pip was to begin his apprenticeship (in chapter 13); guinea coins were slowly going out of circulation after thelast new oneswere struck with the face of George III in 1799. This also marks the historical period, as the one pound note was the official currency at the time of the novel's publication. Dickens placed the epilogue 11 years after Magwitch's death, which seems to be the time limit of the reported facts. Collectively, the details suggest that Dickens identified with the main character. If Pip is around 23 toward the middle of the novel and 34 at its end, he is roughly modeled after his creator who turned 34 in 1846.[81]

The title's "Expectations" refers to "a legacy to come",[119]and thus immediately announces that money, or more specifically wealth plays an important part in the novel.[7]Some other major themes are crime, social class, including both gentility, and social alienation, imperialism and ambition. The novel is also concerned with questions relating to conscience and moral regeneration, as well as redemption through love.

Dickens famously created comic and telling names for his characters,[120]but inGreat Expectationshe goes further. The first sentence of the novel establishes that Pip's proper name is Philip Pirrip—the wording of his father's gravestone—which "my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than Pip". The name Philip Pirrip (or Pirrip) is never again used in the novel. In Chapter 18, when he receives his expectation from an anonymous benefactor, the first condition attached to it is "that you always bear the name of Pip".

In Chapter 22, when Pip establishes his friendship with Herbert Pocket, he attempts to introduce himself as Philip. Herbert immediately rejects the name:"'I don't take to Philip,' said he, smiling, 'for it sounds like a moral boy out of the spelling-book'" and decides to refer to Pip exclusively as Handel:"'Would you mind Handel for a familiar name? There's a charming piece of music by Handel, called theHarmonious Blacksmith'". The only other place he is referred to as Philip is in Chapter 44, when he receives a letter addressed to "Philip Pip" from his friend Wemmick, which says "DON'T GO HOME".

A central theme here is of people living as social outcasts. The novel's opening setting emphasises this: the orphaned Pip lives in an isolated foggy environment next to a graveyard, dangerous swamps, andprison ships. Furthermore, "I was always treated as if I had insisted on being born in opposition to the dictates of reason, religion and morality".[121]

Pip feels excluded by society and this leads to his aggressive attitude towards it, as he tries to win his place within it through any means. Various other characters behave similarly—that is, the oppressed become the oppressors. Jaggers dominates Wemmick, who in turn dominates Jaggers's clients. Likewise, Magwitch uses Pip as an instrument of vengeance, as Miss Havisham uses Estella.[122]

However, Pip has hope despite his sense of exclusion[123]because he is convinced thatdivine providenceowes him a place in society and that marriage to Estella is his destiny. Therefore, when fortune comes his way, Pip shows no surprise, because he believes that his value as a human being and his inherent nobility have been recognized. Thus, Pip accepts Pumblechook's flattery without blinking: "That boy is no common boy"[124]and the "May I?MayI?" associated with handshakes.[125]

From Pip's hope comes his "uncontrollable, impossible love for Estella",[126]despite the humiliations to which she has subjected him. For Pip, winning a place in society also means winning Estella's heart.

When the money secretly provided by Magwitch enables Pip to enter London society, two new related themes, wealth and gentility, are introduced.

As the novel's title implies, money is a theme ofGreat Expectations. Central to this is the idea that wealth is only acceptable to the ruling class if it comes from the labour of others.[127]Miss Havisham's wealth comes not from the sweat of her brow but from rent collected on properties she inherited from her father, a brewer. Her wealth is "pure", and her father's profession as a brewer does not contaminate it. Herbert states in chapter 22 that "while you cannot possibly be genteel and bake, you may be as genteel as never was and brew".[128]Because of her wealth, the old lady, despite her eccentricity, enjoys public esteem. She remains in a constant business relationship with her lawyer Jaggers and keeps a tight grip over her "court" of sycophants, so that, far from representingsocial exclusion, she is the very image of a powerful landed aristocracy that is frozen in the past and "embalmed in its own pride".[129]

On the other hand, Magwitch's wealth is socially unacceptable, firstly because he earned it, not through the efforts of others, but through his own hard work, and secondly because he was a convict, and he earned it in a penal colony. It is argued that the contrast with Miss Havisham's wealth is suggested symbolically. Thus Magwitch's money smells of sweat, and his money is greasy and crumpled: "two fat sweltering one-pound notes that seemed to have been on terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle market in the country",[130]while the coins Miss Havisham gives for Pip's "indentures" shine as if new. Further, it is argued Pip demonstrates his "good breeding", because when he discovers that he owes his transformation into a "gentleman" to such a contaminated windfall, he is repulsed.[129]A. O. J. Cockshut, however, has suggested that there is no difference between Magwitch's wealth and that of Miss Havisham.[131]

Trotter emphasizes the importance of Magwitch's greasy banknotes. Beyond Pip's emotional reaction the notes reveal that Dickens's views on social and economic progress have changed in the years prior to the publication ofGreat Expectations.[132]His novels andHousehold Wordsextensively reflect Dickens's views, and his efforts to contribute to social progress expanded in the 1840s. To illustrate his point, he cites Humphry House who, succinctly, writes that inPickwick Papers, "a bad smell was a bad smell", whereas inOur Mutual FriendandGreat Expectations, "it is a problem".[132][133]

At the time ofThe Great Exhibitionof 1851, Dickens andRichard Henry Horne, an editor ofHousehold Words, wrote an article comparing the British technology that createdthe Crystal Palaceto the few artifacts exhibited by China: England represented an openness to worldwide trade and China isolationism. "To compare China and England is to compare Stoppage to Progress", they concluded. According to Trotter, this was a way to target theTorygovernment's return toprotectionism, which they felt would make England the China of Europe. In fact,Household Words'17 May 1856 issue championed internationalfree trade, comparing the constant flow of money to the circulation of the blood.[134]In the 1850s, Dickens believed in "genuine" wealth, which critic Trotter compares to fresh banknotes, crisp to the touch, pure and odorless.[134]

WithGreat Expectations, Dickens's views about wealth have changed. However, though some sharpsatireexists, no character in the novel has the role of the moralist that condemn Pip and his society. In fact, even Joe and Biddy themselves, paragons of good sense, are complicit, through their exaggerated innate humility, in Pip's social deviancy. Dickens's moral judgement is first made through the way that he contrasts characters: only a few characters keep to the straight and narrow path; Joe, whose values remain unchanged; Matthew Pocket whose pride renders him, to his family's astonishment, unable to flatter his rich relatives; Jaggers, who keeps a cool head and has no illusions about his clients; Biddy, who overcomes her shyness to, from time to time, bring order. The narrator-hero is left to draw the necessary conclusions: in the end, Pip finds the light and embarks on a path of moral regeneration.[135]

In London, neither wealth nor gentility brings happiness. Pip, the apprentice gentleman constantly bemoans his anxiety, his feelings of insecurity,[136]and multiple allusions to overwhelming chronic unease, to weariness, drown his enthusiasm (chapter 34).[137]Wealth, in effect, eludes his control: the more he spends, the deeper he goes into debt to satisfy new needs, which were just as futile as his old ones.

His unusual path to gentility has the opposite effect to what he expected: infinite opportunities become available, certainly, but will power, in proportion, fades and paralyses the soul. In the crowded metropolis, Pip grows disenchanted, disillusioned, and lonely. Alienated from his native Kent, he has lost the support provided by the village blacksmith. In London, he is powerless to join a community, not the Pocket family, much less Jaggers's circle. London has become Pip's prison and, like the convicts of his youth, he is bound in chains: "no Satis House can be built merely with money".[138][N 4]

The idea of "good breeding" and what makes for a "gentleman" other than money, in other words, "gentility", is a central theme ofGreat Expectations. The convict Magwitch covets it by proxy through Pip; Mrs Pocket dreams of acquiring it; it is also found in Pumblechook's sycophancy; it is even seen in Joe, when he stammers between "Pip" and "Sir" during his visit to London, and when Biddy's letters to Pip suddenly become reverent.

There are other characters who are associated with the idea of gentility like, for example, Miss Havisham's seducer, Compeyson, the scarred-face convict. While Compeyson is corrupt, even Magwitch does not forget he is a gentleman.[139]This also includes Estella, who ignores the fact that she is the daughter of Magwitch and another criminal.[129]

There are a couple of ways by which someone can acquire gentility, one being a title, another being family ties to the upper middle class. Mrs Pocket bases every aspiration on the fact that her grandfather failed to be knighted, while Pip hopes that Miss Havisham will eventually adopt him, as adoption, as evidenced by Estella, who behaves like a born and bred little lady, is acceptable.[140]But even more important, though not sufficient, are wealth and education. Pip knows that and endorses it, as he hears from Jaggers through Matthew Pocket: "I was not designed for any profession, and I should be well enough educated for my destiny if I could hold my own with the average of young men in prosperous circumstances."[141]But neither the educated Matthew Pocket, nor Jaggers, who has earned his status solely through his intellect, can aspire to gentility. Bentley Drummle, however, embodies the social ideal, so that Estella marries him without hesitation.[140]

Another theme ofGreat Expectationsis that Pip can undergo "moral regeneration".

In chapter 39, the novel's turning point, Magwitch visits Pip to see the gentleman he has made, and once the convict has hidden in Herbert Pocket's room, Pip realises his situation:

To cope with his situation and his learning that he now needs Magwitch, a hunted, injured man who traded his life for Pip's. Pip can only rely on the power of love for Estella.[143]Pip now goes through a number of different stages each of which, is accompanied by successive realisations about the vanity of the prior certainties.[144]

Pip's problem is more psychological and moral than social. Pip's climbing of the social ladder upon gaining wealth is followed by a corresponding degradation of his integrity. Thus after his first visit in Miss Havisham, the innocent young boy from the marshes, suddenly turns into a liar to dazzle his sister, Mrs Joe, and his Uncle Pumblechook with the tales of a carriage and veal chops.[136]More disturbing is his fascination with Satis House—where he is despised and even slapped, beset by ghostly visions, rejected by the Pockets—and the gradual growth of the mirage of London. The allure of wealth overpowers loyalty and gratitude, even conscience itself. This is evidenced by the urge to buy Joe's return, in chapter 27, Pip's haughty glance as Joe deciphers the alphabet, not to mention the condescending contempt he confesses to Biddy, copying Estella's behaviour toward him.[145]

Pip represents, as do those he mimics, the bankruptcy of the "idea of the gentleman", and becomes the sole beneficiary of vulgarity, inversely proportional to his mounting gentility.[146]In chapter 30, Dickens parodies the new disease that is corroding Pip's moral values through the character "Trabb's boy", who is the only one not to be fooled. The boy parades through the main street of the village with boyish antics and contortions meant to satirically imitate Pip. The gross, comic caricature openly exposes the hypocrisy of thisnewgentleman in a frock coat and top hat. Trabb's boy reveals that appearance has taken precedence over being, protocol on feelings, decorum on authenticity; labels reign to the point of absurdity, and human solidarity is no longer the order of the day.[147]

Estella and Miss Havisham represent rich people who enjoy a materially easier life but cannot cope with a tougher reality. Miss Havisham, like a melodramatic heroine, withdrew from life at the first sign of hardship. Estella, excessively spoiled and pampered, sorely lacks judgement and falls prey to the first gentleman who approaches her, though he is the worst. Estella's marriage to such a brute demonstrates the failure of her education. Estella is used to dominating but becomes a victim to her own vice, brought to her level by a man born, in her image.[148]

Dickens uses imagery to reinforce his ideas and London, the paradise of the rich and of theidealof the gentleman, has mounds of filth, it is crooked, decrepit, and greasy, a dark desert of bricks, soot, rain, and fog. The surviving vegetation is stunted, and confined to fenced-off paths, without air or light. Barnard's Inn, where Pip lodges, offers mediocre food and service while the rooms, despite the furnishing provided, as Suhamy states, "for the money", is most uncomfortable, a far cry from Joe's large kitchen, radiating hearth, and his well-stocked pantry.[138]

Likewise, such a world, dominated by the lure of money and social prejudice, also leads to the warping of people and morals, to family discord and war between man and woman.[N 5]In contrast to London's corruption stands Joe, despite his intellectual and social limitations, in whom the values of the heart prevail and who has natural wisdom.[147]

Another important theme is Pip's sense of guilt, which he has felt from an early age. After the encounter with the convict Magwitch, Pip is afraid that someone will find out about his crime and arrest him. The theme of guilt comes into even greater effect when Pip discovers that his benefactor is a convict. Pip has an internal struggle with his conscience throughoutGreat Expectations, hence the long and painful process of redemption that he undergoes.

Pip's moral regeneration is a true pilgrimage punctuated by suffering. Like Christian inBunyan'sThe Pilgrim's Progress, Pip makes his way up to light through a maze of horrors that afflict his body as well as his mind. This includes the burns he suffers from saving Miss Havisham from the fire; the illness that requires months of recovery; the threat of a violent death at Orlick's hands; debt, and worse, the obligation of having to repay them; hard work, which he recognises as the only worthy source of income, hence his return to Joe's forge. Even more important, is his accepting of Magwitch, a coarse outcast of society.[149]

Dickens makes use of symbolism, in chapter 53, to emphasise Pip's moral regeneration. As he prepares to go down the Thames to rescue the convict, a veil lifted from the river and Pip's spirit. Symbolically the fog which enveloped the marshes as Pip left for London has finally lifted, and he feels ready to become a man.[150]