The Schlegels, a family of intellectual and idealistic sisters, once befriended the Wilcoxes, a wealthy and conventional family, during their time in Germany. Helen Schlegel visits the Wilcoxes' country house, Howards End, where she becomes engaged to Paul Wilcox but soon regrets the hasty decision and they break off the engagement. At a concert, Helen takes Leonard Bast's umbrella by mistake and heads home. After awkwardly retrieving it, Leonard,  an impoverished clerk, leaves with her sister Margaret's card.

Later, the Wilcoxes move to London and become neighbours with the Schlegels. Margaret befriends Ruth Wilcox, the matriarch of the family, who feels a deep connection to Howards End. Ruth, on her deathbed, writes a note leaving the house to Margaret, but her widowed husband Henry and his children conceal the inheritance and burn the note.

Leonard Bast lives with a woman named Jacky. When Jacky shows up at the Schlegels' house looking for her "husband" one night, Helen is mystified. Leonard later explains the situation: he had been out walking under the stars that night and Jacky found Margaret's card. Henry Wilcox and his daughter Evie visit the Schlegels, and Henry recommends that Leonard resign from his job due to the anticipated collapse of his employer’s company. Time passes as Margaret and Henry's friendship turns into a romance. They become engaged despite opposition from Henry's children, who remember and fear their mother’s dying wish to give Howards End to Margaret.

Helen appears at the wedding of Evie Wilcox with Leonard and Jacky, who are now married and in dire financial straits because of Henry's thoughtless advice. He recognizes Jacky as his former mistress and accuses the Schlegels and Basts of plotting against him. Although disturbed by the revelation, Margaret forgives Henry and wishes to salvage their relationship.

Helen strongly disapproves of Henry's mistreatment of the Basts and spends the night with Leonard discussing their plight. Helen later confides in her brother Tibby and decides to send financial help to the Basts, but Leonard returns the first cheque and declines further assistance.

After her wedding to Henry, Margaret becomes concerned about Helen's restless travels. When their Aunt Juley falls ill, Margaret asks Helen to return to England, but Helen refuses to see the family. Margaret and Henry visit Howards End, hoping to surprise Helen, and discover her secret pregnancy. Margaret stands by her sister and urges Henry to forgive her as she has forgiven him, but he remains unconvinced.

Leonard arrives at Howards End the next day, tormented by his affair with Helen and unaware of her presence there. Charles Wilcox attacks Leonard, who stumbles backward into a bookcase. It collapses and falls on him, covering him with books. Leonard, who had undiagnosed heart disease, experiences heart failure and dies. Margaret decides to leave Henry, but he reveals that Charles will be charged with manslaughter by the local authorities. Charles is found guilty and sentenced to prison.

Henry, overwhelmed by shame, agrees to honour Ruth's wish and leave Howards End to Margaret. He also stipulates that, after Margaret's death, the property will pass to the son of Helen and Leonard. Helen returns to Howards End, and the family warmly welcomes her and her son.

In 1998, theModern LibraryrankedHowards End38th on its list of the100 best English-language novels of the 20th century.

AManchester Guardianreview written in the year of the novel's publication praised it as "a novel of high quality written with what appears to be a feminine brilliance of perception."[3]

Critics have describedHowards Endas a "Condition-of-England novel" for its depiction of the poverty and precarity of the Bast family as well as the rapid changes in the social and economic structure of England in theEdwardianperiod.[4]The Wilcox family represent "new money" as well as global capitalism with their ownership of the Imperial and West African Rubber Company, while the German Schlegel sisters represent the educated, cosmopolitan "New Woman" and raise questions of women's suffrage. The Wilcoxes were possibly inspired by the harsh landlords of Forster's childhood home,[5]while the Schlegels were loosely based onVirginia Woolfand her sisterVanessa Bell, who were Forster's contemporaries in the liberal and humanist-minded Bloomsbury Group.[6]

The eponymous house, Howards End, "is a mystical symbol of the beauty and gentility of that fast-disappearing world. The question of who will own it – for which read England's social future – dominates the book."[7]Located in the countryside, away from London, it has immense sentimental value for Mrs Ruth Wilcox, who threatens the male line of inheritance when she attempts to leave the house to her new friend Margaret Schlegel upon her death. The core message of the novel is its epigraph, "Only connect", a similar theme to that of Forster's novelMaurice, which also features cross-class relationships. In the end, the three families are forced into a form of uneasy reconciliation; critic Barbara Morden argues:

Several critics have also assessed the influence of Forster's closeted homosexuality on the novel. CriticVivian Gornickargued that Forster's lack of romantic or sexual experience at the time of writing "haunts" the book: "Unable to achieve emotional experience himself, yet impelled to write about it, he here adopts the intellectually intelligent voice of a writer who senses the import of what lies behind the tragedy of life but doesn't really know what he's talking about."[9]