Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy, and their mother, whom they call Marmee, live in a new neighborhood (loosely based onConcord) inMassachusettsingenteel poverty. Having lost all his money, their father is serving as achaplainfor theUnion Armyin theAmerican Civil War, far from home. The mother and daughters face their firstChristmaswithout him. When Marmee asks them to give their Christmasbreakfastaway to animpoverishedfamily, the girls and their mother venture into town, laden with baskets, to feed the hungry children. When they return, they discover their wealthy, elderly neighbor, Mr. Laurence, has sent over a decadent surprise dinner, to make up for their breakfast. The two families become acquainted following these acts of kindness.

Meg and Jo must work to support the family: Megtutorsa nearby family of four children; Jo assists her agedgreat-auntMarch, a wealthywidowliving in amansionin Plumfield. Beth, too timid for school, is content to stay at home and help with housework; and Amy is still at school. Meg is beautiful and traditional, Jo is atomboywho writes, Beth is a peacemaker and apianist, and Amy is anartistwho longs for elegance andfine society. The sisters strive to help their family and improve their characters, as Meg is vain, Jo is hotheaded, Beth is cripplingly shy, and Amy is materialistic. Laurie, Mr. Laurence's orphaned grandson, becomes close friends with the sisters, particularly the tomboyish Jo.

The girls keep busy as the war goes on. Jo writes a novel that gets published but is frustrated to have to edit it down and can't comprehend the conflicting critical response. Meg is invited to spend two weeks with rich friends, where there are parties andcotillionsfor the girls to dance with boys and improve their social skills. Laurie is invited to one of the dances, and Meg's friends incorrectly think she is in love with him. Meg is more interested in John Brooke, Laurie's young tutor.

Word comes that Mr. March is ill withpneumoniaand Marmee leaves to nurse him inWashington, DC. Mr. Laurence offers to accompany her, but she declines, knowing travel would be uncomfortable for the old man. Mr. Laurence, instead, sends John Brooke to do his business in Washington and help the Marches. While in Washington, Brooke confesses his love for Meg to her parents. They are pleased but consider Meg too young to marry, so, Brooke agrees to wait.

While Marmee is in Washington, Beth contractsscarlet fever, after spending time with a poor family, where three children die. As a precaution, Amy is sent to live with Aunt March and replaces Jo as her companion and helper. Jo, who already had scarlet fever, tends to Beth. After many days of illness, the family doctor advises the family send for Marmee. Beth recovers, but never fully regains her health and energy.

While Brooke waits for Meg to come of age to marry, he joins the military and serves in the war. After being wounded, he returns to find work, so he can buy a house for when he and Meg marry. Laurie goes to college. On Christmas Day, a year after the book's opening, the girls' father returns home.

(Published separately in the United Kingdom asGood Wives)

Three years later, Meg and John wed and work to adjust to married life. When they havetwins, Meg is a devoted mother but John begins to feel neglected. Meg seeks advice from Marmee, who helps her find balance by making more time for wifely duties and encouraging John to become more involved with child rearing.

Laurie graduates from college, doing well in his last year with Jo's prompting. Amy is chosen over Jo to go on a European tour with her aunt. Beth's health is weak, due to complications from scarlet fever, lowering her spirits. While trying to understand Beth's sadness, Jo realizes that Laurie has fallen in love. At first she believes it is with Beth, but soon senses it is with herself. Jo confides in Marmee, telling her that she loves Laurie like a brother but does not love him in a romantic way.

Jo wants a little adventure and to put distance between herself and Laurie, hoping he will overcome his feelings. She spends six months in New York City with a friend of her mother who runs a boarding house, serving asgovernessfor her two children. Jo takes German lessons from another boarder, Professor Friedrich Bhaer. He has come from Berlin to care for his sister's orphaned sons. For extra money, Jo anonymously writes salacious romance stories for sensational newspapers. Suspecting her secret, Friedrich mentions such writing is unprincipled and base, which persuade Jo to give up that literary genre. As Jo's time in New York ends, she is unaware that Friedrich is in love with her. When she returns to Massachusetts, Laurie proposes marriage, which she declines.

Laurie travels to Europe with his grandfather to escape his heartbreak. At home, Beth's scarlet fever has left her permanently weakened. Jo becomes devoted to caring for her dying sister. Laurie encounters Amy in Europe and slowly falls in love with her, seeing her in a new light. She is unimpressed by his aimless, idle, and forlorn attitude since being rejected by Jo. She inspires him to find his purpose in life and do something worthwhile. News of Beth's death brings them together and a romance soon grows. Amy's aunt will not allow Amy to return home with Laurie and his grandfather unchaperoned. Amy and Laurie marry before leaving Europe.

Friedrich, in Massachusetts on business, visits the Marches daily for two weeks. On his last day, he proposes to Jo, who realizes she loves him and they become engaged. Because Friedrich is poor, he must first establish a good income and goes west to teach. A year passes without much success. Later, Aunt March dies and leaves her large estate, Plumfield, to Jo. She marries Friedrich and turns the house into a school for boys. They have two sons, and Amy and Laurie have a daughter. At apple-picking time, Marmee celebrates her 60th birthday at Plumfield, with her husband, her three surviving daughters, their husbands, and five grandchildren.

Meg, the oldest sister, is 16, when the story starts. She is described as a beauty, and she manages the household, when her mother is absent. She has long brown hair and blue eyes and particularly beautiful hands, and she is seen as the prettiest one of the sisters. Meg fulfils expectations for women of the time; from the start, she is already a nearly perfect "little woman," in the eyes of the world.[14]Before her marriage to John Brooke, while still living at home, she often lectures her younger sisters to ensure they grow to embody the title of "little women".[15]

Meg is employed as a governess for the Kings, a wealthy local family. Because of their father's family's social standing, Meg makes herdebutinto high society, but she is lectured by her friend and neighbor, Theodore "Laurie" Laurence, for behaving like a snob. Meg marries John Brooke, Laurie's tutor. They have twins, Margaret "Daisy" Brooke and John Laurence "Demi" Brooke. The sequel,Little Men,mentions a baby daughter, Josephine "Josie" Brooke,[16]who is 14, at the beginning of the final book.[17]

According to Sarah Elbert, "democratic domesticity requires maturity, strength, and above all, a secure identity that Meg lacks".[7]: 204Others believe Alcott does not intend to belittle Meg for her ordinary life and writes her with loving detail, suffused with sentimentality.[18]

The principal character, Jo, 15 years old at the beginning of the book, is a strong and willful young woman, struggling to subdue her fiery temper and stubborn personality.[19][20]

Second oldest of the four sisters, Jo is masculine, the smartest, most creative one in the family; her father has referred to her as his "son Jo," and her best friend and neighbor, Theodore "Laurie" Laurence, sometimes calls her "my dear fellow," while she, alone, calls him Teddy. Jo has a "hot" temper that often leads her into trouble. With the help of her own misguided sense of humor, her sister, Beth, and her mother, she works on controlling it. It has been said that much of Louisa May Alcott shows through in these characteristics of Jo.[21]In her essay, "Recollections of My Childhood," Alcott refers to herself as a tomboy who enjoyed boys' activities, like running foot-races and climbing trees.

Jo lovesliterature, both reading and writing. She composes plays for her sisters to perform and writes short stories. She initially rejects the idea of marriage and romance, feeling that it would break up her family and separate her from the sisters whom she adores. While pursuing a literary career in New York City, she meets Friedrich Bhaer, a German professor. On her return home, Laurie proposes marriage to Jo, which she rejects, thus confirming her independence. Another reason for the rejection is that the love that Laurie has for Jo is more a brotherly love, rather than romantic love, the difference between which he was unable to understand, because he was "just a boy," as said by Alcott in the book.

After Beth dies, Professor Bhaer woos Jo at her home, when "they decide to share life's burdens, just as they shared the load of bundles on their shopping expedition".[7]: 210She is 25 years old when she accepts his proposal. The marriage is deferred, until her unexpected inheritance of her Aunt March's home, a year later. According to criticBarbara Sicherman, "The crucial first point is that the choice is hers, its quirkiness another sign of her much-prized individuality."[22]: 21They have two sons, Robert "Rob" Bhaer and Theodore "Ted" Bhaer. Jo also writes the first part ofLittle Womenduring the second portion of the novel. According to Elbert, "her narration signals a successfully completed adolescence".[7]: 199

Beth, 13 when the story starts, is described as kind, gentle, sweet, shy, quiet, honest, and musical. She is the shyest March sister and the pianist of the family.[23]: 53Infused with quiet wisdom, she is the peacemaker of the family, and she gently scolds her sisters, when they argue.[24]As her sisters grow up, they begin to leave home, but Beth has no desire to leave her house or family. She is especially close to Jo: when Beth developsscarlet fever, after visiting the Hummels, Jo does most of the nursing and rarely leaves her side. Beth recovers from the acute disease, but her health is permanently weakened.

As she grows, Beth begins to realize that her time with her loved ones is coming to an end. Finally, the family accepts that Beth will not live much longer. They make a special room for her, filled with all the things she loves best: her kittens, her piano, Father's books, Amy's sketches, and her beloved dolls. She is never idle; she knits and sews things for the children who pass by on their way to and from school. But eventually, she puts down her sewing needle, saying it grew "heavy."  Beth's final sickness has a strong effect on her sisters, especially Jo, who resolves to live her life with more consideration and care for everyone. The main loss duringLittle Womenis the death of beloved Beth. Her "self-sacrifice is ultimately the greatest in the novel. She gives up her life, knowing that it has had only private, domestic meaning."[7]: 206–207

Amy is the youngest sister and baby of the family; she's 12, when the story begins. Interested in art, she is described as a "regular snow-maiden," with curly golden hair and blue eyes, "pale and slender" and "always carrying herself" like a proper young lady. She is the artist of the family.[25]Often coddled, because she is the youngest, Amy can behave in a vain and self-centered way, though she does still love her family.[26]: 5She has the middle name Curtis, and is the only March sister to use her full name, rather than a diminutive.[27]

Amy's aunt chooses her to accompany her to Europe, rather than her sister, Jo. There, she matures and makes a decision, based on her limited artistic talent, how to direct her adult life. She encounters Theodore "Laurie" Laurence and his grandfather during the extended visit. Amy is the least inclined of the sisters to sacrifice and self-denial. She behaves well in upper-class society and is at ease with herself. Critic Martha Saxton observes the author was never fully at ease with Amy's moral development, and her success in life seemed relatively accidental.[26]However, Amy's morality does appear to develop throughout her adolescence and early adulthood, and she can confidently and justly put Laurie in his place when she believes he is wasting his life on pleasurable activities. Ultimately, Amy is shown to work hard to gain what she wants and make the most of her success, when she has it. She marries Laurie after Jo rejected him. They have a daughter, Elizabeth "Bess" Laurence, named after her late sister, Beth.[28]

For her books, Alcott was often inspired by familiar elements. The characters inLittle Womenare recognizably drawn from family members and friends.[3][4]: 202Her married sister Anna was Meg, the family beauty. Lizzie, Alcott's beloved sister, was the model for Beth. Like Beth, Lizzie was quiet and retiring. She died tragically at age twenty-three from the lingering effects of scarlet fever, as did Beth.[39]May, Alcott's strong-willed sister, was portrayed as Amy, whose pretentious affectations cause her occasional downfalls.[4]: 202Alcott portrayed herself as Jo. Alcott readily corresponded with readers who addressed her as "Miss March" or "Jo", and she did not correct them.[40][41]: 31

However, Alcott's portrayal, even if inspired by her family, is an idealized one. For instance, Mr. March is portrayed as a hero of theAmerican Civil War, a gainfully employedchaplain, and, presumably, a source of inspiration to the women of the family. He is absent for most of the novel.[41]: 51In contrast, Bronson Alcott was very present in his family's household, due in part to his inability to find steady work. While he espoused many of the educational principles touted by the March family, he was loud and dictatorial. His lack of financial independence was a source of humiliation to his wife and daughters.[41]: 51The March family is portrayed as living in genteel penury, but the Alcott family, dependent on an improvident, impractical father, suffered real poverty and occasional hunger.[42]In addition to her own childhood and that of her sisters, scholars who have examined the diaries of Louisa Alcott's mother, Abigail Alcott, have surmised thatLittle Womenwas also heavily inspired by Abigail Alcott's own early life.[29]: 6Originally, Alcott did not want to publishLittle Women, claiming she found it boring, and wasn't sure how to write girls as she knew few beyond her sisters. However, encouraged by her editor Thomas Niles, she wrote it within 10 weeks.[43]

Also,Little Womenhas several textual and structural references toJohn Bunyan'snovelThe Pilgrim's Progress.[44]Jo and her sisters read it at the outset of the book and try to follow the good example of Bunyan's Christian. Throughout the novel, the main characters refer many times toThe Pilgrim's Progressand liken the events in their own lives to the experiences of the pilgrims. Several chapter titles directly reference characters and places fromThe Pilgrim's Progress.

In addition to drawing on her own life during the development ofLittle Women,Alcott also took influence from several of her earlier works including "The Sisters' Trial", "A Modern Cinderella", and "In the Garret". The characters within these short stories and poems, in addition to Alcott's own family and personal relationships, inspired the general concepts and bases for many of the characters inLittle Women.[45]

The first volume ofLittle Womenwas published in 1868 by Roberts Brothers.[46]The first edition included illustrations byAbigail May Alcott, the sister commonly called "May" who inspired the fictional Amy March. She "struggled" with her illustrative additions to her sister's book, but later improved her skills and found some success as an artist.[47]

The first printing of 2,000 copies sold out quickly, and the company had trouble keeping up with the demand for additional printings. They announced: "The great literary hit of the season is undoubtedly Miss Alcott'sLittle Women, the orders for which continue to flow in upon us to such an extent as to make it impossible to answer them with promptness."[9]: 37The last line of Chapter 23 in the first volume states: "So the curtain falls upon Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy. Whether it ever rises again, depends upon the reception given the first act of the domestic drama called Little Women."[48]Alcott delivered the manuscript for the second volume on New Year's Day 1869, just three months after publication of part one.[10]: 345

Versions in the late 20th and 21st centuries combine bothLittle WomenandGood Wivesinto one book under the titleLittle Women, with the latter marked as Part 2 (chapters 24 to 47).[49]Each chapter is numbered and has a title as well. Part 2, Chapter 24 opens with: "In order that we may start afresh and go to Meg's wedding with free minds, it will be well to begin with a little gossip about the Marches."[48]

The British influence, giving Part 2 its own title,Good Wives, has the book still published in two volumes, withGood Wivesbeginning three years afterLittle Womenends, especially in the UK and Canada, but also with some US editions. Some editions listed underLittle Womenappear to include both parts, especially in the audiobook versions.[citation needed]Editions are shown in continuous print from many publishers, as hardback, paperback, audio, and e-book versions, from the 1980s to 2015.[citation needed]This split of the two volumes also shows at Goodreads, which refers to the books as theLittle Womenseries, includingLittle Women,Good Wives,Little MenandJo's Boys.[50][51][52]

G. K. Chestertonbelieved Alcott inLittle Women, "anticipatedrealismby twenty or thirty years", and that Fritz's proposal to Jo, and her acceptance, "is one of the really human things in human literature".[53]Gregory S. Jackson said that Alcott's use of realism belongs to the American Protestant pedagogical tradition, which includes a range of religious literary traditions with which Alcott was familiar. He has copies in his book of nineteenth-century images of devotional children's guides which provide background for the game of "pilgrims progress" that Alcott uses in her plot of Book One.[54]

Little Womenwas well received upon first publication. According to 21st-century critic Barbara Sicherman there was, during the 19th century, a "scarcity of models for nontraditional womanhood", which led more women to look toward "literature for self-authorization. This is especially true during adolescence."[22]: 2Little Womenbecame "the paradigmatic text for young women of the era and one in which family literary culture is prominently featured".[22]: 3Adult elements of women's fiction inLittle Womenincluded "a change of heart necessary" for the female protagonist to evolve in the story.[7]: 199

In the late 20th century, some scholars criticized the novel. Sarah Elbert, for instance, wrote thatLittle Womenwas the beginning of "a decline in the radical power of women's fiction", partly because women's fiction was being idealized with a "hearth and home" children's story.[7]: 197Women's literature historians and juvenile fiction historians have agreed thatLittle Womenwas the beginning of this "downward spiral". But Elbert says thatLittle Womendid not "belittle women's fiction" and that Alcott stayed true to her "Romantic birthright".[7]: 198–199

Little Women's popular audience was responsive to ideas of social change as they were shown "within the familiar construct of domesticity".[7]: 220While Alcott had been commissioned to "write a story for girls", her primary heroine, Jo March, became a favorite of many different women, including educated women writers through the 20th century. The girl story became a "new publishing category with a domestic focus that paralleled boys' adventure stories".[22]: 3–4

One reason the novel was so popular was that it appealed to different classes of women along with those of different national backgrounds, at a time of high immigration to the United States. Through the March sisters, women could relate and dream where they may not have before.[22]: 3–4"Both the passionLittle Womenhas engendered in diverse readers and its ability to survive its era and transcend its genre point to a text of unusual permeability."[22]: 35

At the time, young girls perceived that marriage was their end goal. After the publication of the first volume, many girls wrote to Alcott asking her "who the little women marry".[22]: 21Sicherman said that the ending, which she personally characterizes as "unsatisfying", worked to "keep the story alive" as if the reader might find it ended differently upon different readings.[22]: 21Anne E. Boyd contends that "Alcott particularly battled the conventional marriage plot in writingLittle Women".[55]Alcott did not have Jo accept Laurie's hand in marriage; rather, when she arranged for Jo to marry, she portrayed an unconventional man as her husband. In Sicherman's opinion, Alcott used Friedrich to "subvert adolescent romantic ideals" because he was much older and seemingly unsuited for Jo.[22]: 21However, the character was partially based upon older men Alcott was attracted to, such asHenry David ThoreauandRalph Waldo Emerson,[31][35]or admired, such as German writersCharles FollenandJohann Wolfgang von Goethe.[35][32][33]In particular, Alcott had considered Goethe her "chief idol" since the day Emerson had introduced her to Goethe and handed her a copy ofWilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship[34]Bhaer is also representative of Alcott's reverence forGerman culture.[56]

In 2003Little Womenwas ranked number 18 inThe Big Read, a survey of the British public by theBBCto determine the "Nation's Best-loved Novel" (not children's novel); it is fourth-highest among novels published in the U.S. on that list.[57]Based on a 2007 online poll, the U.S.National Education Associationlisted it as one of its "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children".[58]In 2012 it was ranked number 47 among all-time children's novels in a survey published bySchool Library Journal, a monthly with primarily US audience.[59]

Little Womenhas been one of the most widely read novels, noted by Stern from a 1927 report inThe New York Timesand cited inLittle Women and the Feminist Imagination: Criticism, Controversy, Personal Essays.[60]Ruth MacDonald argued that "Louisa May Alcott stands as one of the great American practitioners of the girls' novel and the family story".[61]

In the 1860s, gendered separation of children's fiction was a newer division in literature. This division signaled a beginning of polarization of gender roles as social constructs "as class stratification increased".[22]: 18Joy Kasson wrote, "Alcott chronicled the coming of age of young girls, their struggles with issues such as selfishness and generosity, the nature of individual integrity, and, above all, the question of their place in the world around them."[62]Girls related to the March sisters inLittle Women, along with following the lead of their heroines, by assimilating aspects of the story into their own lives.[22]: 22

After readingLittle Women,some women felt the need to "acquire new and more public identities," however dependent on other factors, such as financial resources.[22]: 55WhileLittle Womenshowed the regular lives of American middle-class girls, it also "legitimized" their dreams to do something different and allowed them to consider the possibilities.[22]: 36More young women started writing stories that had adventurous plots and "stories of individual achievement—traditionally coded male—challenged women's socialization into domesticity".[22]: 55Little Womenalso influenced contemporary European immigrants to the United States who wanted to assimilate into the middle-class culture.

In the pages ofLittle Women, young and adolescent girls read the normalization of ambitious women. This provided an alternative to the previously normalized gender roles.[22]: 35Little Womenrepeatedly reinforced the importance of "individuality" and "female vocation".[22]: 26Little Womenhad "continued relevance of its subject" and "its longevity points, as well to surprising continuities in gender norms from the 1860s at least through the 1960s".[22]: 35Those interested in domestic reform could look to the pages ofLittle Womento see how a "democratic household" would operate.[7]: 276

While "Alcott never questioned the value of domesticity," she challenged the social constructs that made spinsters obscure and fringe members of society, solely because they were not married.[7]: 193"Little Womenindisputably enlarges the myth of American womanhood, by insisting that the home and the women's sphere cherish individuality and thus produce young adults who can make their way in the world, while preserving a critical distance from its social arrangements." As with all youth, the March girls had to grow up. These sisters, and in particular, Jo, were apprehensive about adulthood, because they were afraid that, by conforming to what society wanted, they would lose their special individuality.[7]: 199

Alcott's Jo also made professional writing imaginable for generations of women. Writers as diverse asMaxine Hong Kingston,Margaret Atwood, andJ. K. Rowlinghave noted the influence of Jo March on their artistic development. Even other fictional portraits of young women aspiring to authorship often reference Jo March.[63]

Alcott's novel is often celebrated for Jo and her narrative arch in which she becomes a self-determined woman with a career. However, framing this novel as a success, solely for Jo's accomplishments, portrays it as a "traditional 'lone genius' patriarchal narrative" in which only women who are "categorized as 'exceptional' or particularly 'worthy'" are celebrated.[64]Little Womenawards all its women worthy, despite their status as conventional or unconventional—not just Jo, who is the obvious exception to societal expectation. Alcott's novel celebrates the agency of women, the four sisters and their mother, to choose their path in life. Meg makes the decision to marry and have children and though it is the traditional pathway, she makes the choice for her own happiness. Thus, reducing Alcott's novel to just Jo's experience as an exception promotes it as a patriarchal narrative and erases her careful work to portray a matriarchal narrative, rich with female agency and voice.

Alcott "made women's rights integral to her stories, and above all, toLittle Women".[7]: 193Alcott's fiction became her "most important feminist contribution"—even considering all the effort Alcott made to help facilitate women's rights".[7]: 193She thought that "a democratic household could evolve into a feminist society." InLittle Women, she imagined that just such an evolution might begin with Plumfield, a nineteenth-century feminist utopia.[7]: 194

Little Womenhas been adapted to film seven times. Thefirst adaptationwas asilent filmdirected byAlexander Butlerand released in 1917, which starredDaisy Burrellas Amy, Mary Lincoln as Meg,Ruby Milleras Jo, and Muriel Myers as Beth. It is considered alost film.[72]

Anothersilent film adaptationwas released in 1918 and directed byHarley Knoles. It starredIsabel Lamonas Meg,Dorothy Bernardas Jo, Lillian Hall as Beth, and Florence Flinn as Amy. It is also considered a lost film.[73]

George Cukordirected thefirst sound adaptationofLittle Women, starringKatharine Hepburnas Jo,Joan Bennettas Amy,Frances Deeas Meg, andJean Parkeras Beth. The film was released in 1933.[74]InRadio City Music Hallthe film was "breaking box-office records" in the fall of 1933, and Hepburn received top billing.[75]It was followed by anadaptation ofLittle Menthe following year.[citation needed]

Thefirst color adaptationstarredJune Allysonas Jo,Margaret O'Brienas Beth,Elizabeth Tayloras Amy, andJanet Leighas Meg. Directed byMervyn LeRoy, it was released in 1949. The filmreceived two Academy Award nominations for color film, for Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction/Set Direction, the latter for which it received the Oscar.[76]

Gillian Armstrongdirected a1994 adaptation, starringWinona Ryderas Jo,Trini Alvaradoas Meg,Samantha MathisandKirsten Dunstas Amy,Claire Danesas Beth,Christian Baleas Laurie andSusan Sarandonas Marmee. The film received three Academy Award nominations, includingBest Actressfor Ryder.[77]

Acontemporary film adaptation[78]was released in 2018 to mark the 150th anniversary of the novel.[79]It was directed by Clare Niederpruem in her directorial debut and starred Sarah Davenport as Jo, Allie Jennings as Beth, Melanie Stone as Meg, and Elise Jones and Taylor Murphy as Amy.[79]

Writer, and directorGreta Gerwigtook on the story in her2019 adaptation of the novel. The film starsSaoirse Ronanas Jo,Emma Watsonas Meg,Florence Pughas Amy,Laura Dernas Marmee,Meryl Streepas Aunt March,Eliza Scanlenas Beth andTimothee Chalametas Laurie. The film received six Academy Award nominations, includingBest Picture.[80]

Little Womenwas adapted into a television musical, in 1958, by composerRichard AdlerforCBS.[81]

Little Womenhas been made into aserialfour times by theBBC: in1950(when it was shown live), in1958, in1970, and in2017. The 3-episode 2017 series development was supported by PBS, and was aired as part of the PBSMasterpieceanthology in 2018.

In 1950, the AmericananthologyseriesStudio Oneaired atwo-part adaptation consisting of two hour-long episodesonCBS. The first wasLittle Women: Meg's Storyon December 18, followed byLittle Women: Jo's Storyon Christmas day.Meg's Storywas directed byPaul NickellandJo's StorybyLela Swift. It featured a teleplay bySumner Locke Elliottand starredNancy Marchandas Jo,June Daytonas Beth,Peg Hilliasas Mrs. March,Lois Hallas Amy,Mary Sinclairas Meg,Elizabeth Pattersonas Aunt March,Kent Smithas Bhaer,John Baragreyas Mr. Brooks,Berry Kroegeras Mr. Laurence,Una O'Connoras Hannah, andConrad BainDr. Bangs.[82][83]In 1958, CBS aired a musical version starringFlorence Henderson.[84]

Universal Televisionproduceda two-part miniseriesbased on the novel, which aired onNBCin 1978. It was followed by a 1979 series.

In the 1980s, multiple anime adaptations were made. In 1980, an anime special was made as a predecessor to the 26-part 1981 anime seriesLittle Women. Then, in 1987, another adaptation titledTales of Little Womenwas released. All anime specials and series were dubbed in English and shown on American television.Ai no Wakakusa Monogatarican be streamed on Amazon Prime.[85]

In 2012,LifetimeairedThe March Sisters at Christmas(directed by John Simpson), a contemporary television film focusing on the title characters' efforts to save their family home from being sold.[86]

In 2017, BBC television aired a miniseriesadaptationdeveloped byHeidi Thomas, directed byVanessa Caswill. The three one-hour episodes were first broadcast on BBC One onBoxing Day2017 and the following two days. The cast includedMaya Hawke,Emily Watson,Michael GambonandAngela Lansbury. Production was supported by PBS and the miniseries was shown as part of its Masterpiece anthology.

A 2018 adaption is that of Manor Rama Pictures LLP of Karan Raj Kohli & Viraj Kapur which streams on the ALTBalaji app in India. The web series is calledHaq Se. Set in Kashmir, the series is a modern-day Indian adaptation of the book.[citation needed]

ASouth Korean adaptationwas developed and produced byStudio Dragonfor local cable networktvNandNetflix. Written by Chung Seo-kyung[87]and directed by Kim Hee-won, it aired in September 2022.

The novel was adapted to amusical of the same namewith a book byAllan Knee, lyrics byMindi Dickstein, and music byJason Howlandand debuted on Broadway at theVirginia Theatreon January 23, 2005 and closed on May 22, 2005 after 137 performances. A production was also staged in Sydney, Australia in 2008.[88]

Eleanor Everest FreeradaptedLittle Womenas an opera, writing both the score and libretto.[89]Freer's opera, a two-act work in English, debuted in Chicago at the Musician's Club of Women on April 2, 1934.[90]

TheHouston Grand Operacommissioned and performedLittle Womenin 1998. The opera was aired on television byPBSin 2001 and has been staged by other opera companies since the premiere.[91]

The novel has inspired a number of other literary retellings by various authors. Books inspired byLittle Womeninclude the following:

My Brilliant FriendbyElena Ferranteincludes a child writer who loves readingLittle Women.[105]

The March Family Letterswas released by Pemberley Digital onYouTubein 2015, reimagining the story in a series ofvlogsreleased twice a week. The series reimagined the sisters as a modern-day family inTorontomaking their vlogs for their mother, who is serving with theCanadian Armed Forces. The team incorporated social media by giving the main characters their own real-life accounts onFacebook,Twitter, andTumblr. The series was created by Sarah Shelson and Lauren Evans.[106]