Middlemarchcentres on the lives of residents of Middlemarch, a fictitious Midlands town, from 1829 onwards – the years up to the1832 Reform Act. The narrative may be considered to consist of four plots with unequal emphasis:[17]the life of Dorothea Brooke, the career of Tertius Lydgate, the courtship of Mary Garth by Fred Vincy, and the disgrace of Nicholas Bulstrode. The two main plots are those of Dorothea and Lydgate.[18]Each plot occurs concurrently, although Bulstrode's is centred on the later chapters.[19]

Dorothea Brooke is a 19-year-old orphan, living with her younger sister, Celia, as a ward of her uncle, Mr Brooke. Dorothea is an especially pious young woman whose hobby involves the renovation of buildings belonging to the tenant farmers, although her uncle discourages her. Dorothea is courted by Sir James Chettam, a man close to her own age, but she is oblivious to him. She is attracted instead to the Rev. Edward Casaubon, a 45-year-old scholar. Dorothea accepts Casaubon's offer of marriage, despite her sister's misgivings. Chettam is encouraged to turn his attention to Celia, who has developed an interest in him.

Fred and Rosamond Vincy are the eldest children of Middlemarch's town mayor. Having never finished university, Fred is widely seen as a failure and a layabout, but is content because he is the presumed heir of his childless uncle Mr Featherstone, a rich but unpleasant man. Featherstone keeps as a companion a niece of his by marriage, Mary Garth; although she is considered plain, Fred is in love with her and wants to marry her.

Dorothea and Casaubon experience the first tensions in their marriage on their honeymoon in Rome, when Dorothea finds that her husband has no interest in involving her in his intellectual pursuits. She meets Will Ladislaw, Casaubon's much younger disinherited cousin, whom he supports financially. Ladislaw begins to feel attracted to Dorothea; she remains oblivious, but the two become friendly.

Fred becomes deeply in debt and finds himself unable to repay what he owes. Having asked Mr Garth, Mary's father, to co-sign the debt, he now tells Garth he must forfeit it. As a result, Mrs Garth's savings from four years of income, held in reserve for the education of one of her sons, are wiped out, as are Mary's savings. Mr Garth consequently warns Mary against ever marrying Fred.

Fred comes down with typhoid fever and is treated by Dr Tertius Lydgate, a newly-arrived doctor in Middlemarch. Lydgate has modern ideas about medicine and sanitation which draw the ire and criticism of many in town. He allies himself with Bulstrode, a wealthy, church-going landowner and developer who wants to build a hospital and clinic that follow Lydgate's philosophy, despite the misgivings of Lydgate's friend, the Rev. Farebrother, about Bulstrode's integrity. Lydgate also becomes acquainted with Rosamond Vincy, who is beautiful and educated, but shallow and self-absorbed. Seeking to make a good match, she decides to marry Lydgate, who comes from a wealthy family, and uses Fred's sickness as an opportunity to get close to him. Lydgate initially views their relationship as pure flirtation and backs away from Rosamond after discovering that the town considers them practically engaged. However, on seeing her a final time, he breaks his resolution, and the two become engaged.

Casaubon arrives back from Rome about the same time, but suffers a heart attack. Lydgate attends him and tells Dorothea it is difficult to pronounce on the nature of Casaubon's illness and chances of recovery: that he may indeed live about 15 years if he takes it easy and ceases his studies, but it is equally possible the disease may develop rapidly, in which case death will be sudden. As Fred recovers, Mr Featherstone falls ill. On his deathbed, he reveals that he has made two wills and tries to get Mary to help him destroy one. Unwilling to be involved in the business, she refuses, and Featherstone dies with both wills still intact. Featherstone's plan had been for £10,000 to go to Fred Vincy, but his estate and fortune instead go to his illegitimate son, Joshua Rigg.

Casaubon, in poor health, has grown suspicious of Dorothea's goodwill to Ladislaw. He tries to make Dorothea promise, if he should die, to forever "avoid doing what I should deprecate, and apply yourself to do what I should desire". She hesitates to make a promise without knowing what it would entail, and he dies before she can reply. Casaubon's will is revealed to contain a provision that, if Dorothea marries Ladislaw, she will lose her inheritance. This proviso leads to the general suspicion that Ladislaw and Dorothea are lovers, creating awkwardness between the two. Ladislaw is in love with Dorothea but keeps this secret, having no desire to involve her in scandal or cause her disinheritance. She realizes she has romantic feelings for him, but must suppress them. He remains in Middlemarch, working as a newspaper editor for Mr Brooke, who is mounting a campaign to run forParliamenton aReformplatform.

Lydgate's efforts to please Rosamond soon leave him deeply in debt, and he is forced to seek help from Bulstrode. Meanwhile, Fred Vincy's humiliation at being responsible for Caleb Garth's financial setbacks shocks him into reassessing his life. He resolves to train as aland agentunder the forgiving Caleb. He asks the Rev. Farebrother to plead his case to Mary Garth, not realizing that Farebrother is also in love with her. Farebrother does speak to her, thereby sacrificing his own desires for the sake of Mary, who he realises truly loves Fred and is just waiting for Fred to find his place in the world.

John Raffles, a mysterious man who knows of Bulstrode's shady past, appears in Middlemarch, intending to blackmail him. In his youth, the church-going Bulstrode engaged in questionable financial dealings; his fortune is founded on his marriage to a wealthy, much older widow. The widow's daughter, who should have inherited her mother's fortune, had run away; Bulstrode located her but did not tell the widow, so that he, instead of her daughter, inherited the fortune. The widow's daughter had a son, who turns out to be Ladislaw. On grasping their connection, Bulstrode is consumed with guilt and offers Ladislaw a large sum of money, which Ladislaw refuses as being tainted. Bulstrode's terror of public exposure as a hypocrite leads him to hasten the death of the mortally sick Raffles, while lending a large sum to Lydgate, whom Bulstrode had previously refused to bail out of his debt. However, the story of Bulstrode's misdeeds has already spread. Bulstrode's disgrace engulfs Lydgate: knowledge of the loan spreads and he is assumed to be complicit with Bulstrode. Only Dorothea and Farebrother retain any faith in him, yet the widespread condemnation still drives Lydgate and Rosamond to leave Middlemarch. Disgraced and reviled, Bulstrode's one consolation is that his wife stands by him as he too faces exile.

When Mr Brooke's election campaign collapses, Ladislaw decides to leave the town and visits Dorothea to say his farewell, but Dorothea has fallen in love with him. She renounces Casaubon's fortune and shocks her family by announcing that she will marry Ladislaw. At the same time, Fred, having been successful in his new career, marries Mary.

The "Finale" details the ultimate fortunes of the main characters. Fred and Mary marry and live contentedly with their three sons. Lydgate operates a successful practice outside Middlemarch and attains a good income, but never finds fulfilment and dies at the age of 50, leaving Rosamond and four children. After he dies, Rosamond marries a wealthy physician. Ladislaw engages in public reform, and Dorothea is content as a wife and mother to their two children. Their son eventually inherits Arthur Brooke's estate.

The action ofMiddlemarchtakes place "between September 1829 and May 1832", or 40 years before its publication in 1871–1872,[2]a gap not so pronounced for it to be regularly labelled as ahistorical novel. By comparison,Walter Scott'sWaverley(1814) – often seen as the first major historical novel – takes place some 60 years before it appears.[2]Eliot had previously written a more obviously historical novel,Romola(1862–1863), set in 15th-centuryFlorence. The critics Kathleen Blake and Michael York Mason argue that there has been insufficient attention given toMiddlemarch"as a historical novel that evokes the past in relation to the present".[20]

The critic Rosemary Ashton notes that the lack of attention to this side of the novel may indicate its merits: "Middlemarchis that very rare thing, a successful historical novel. In fact, it is so successful that we scarcely think of it in terms of that subgenre of fiction."[2]For its contemporary readers, the present "was the passage of theSecond Reform Actin 1867";[21]the agitation for theReform Act 1832and its turbulent passage through the twoHouses of Parliament, which provide the structure of the novel, would have been seen as the past.[20]

Though rarely categorised as a historical novel,Middlemarch's attention to historical detail has been noticed; in an 1873 review,Henry Jamesrecognised that Eliot's "purpose was to be a generous rural historian".[22]Elsewhere, Eliot has been seen to adopt "the role of imaginative historian, even scientific investigator inMiddlemarchand her narrator as conscious "of the historiographical questions involved in writing a social and political history of provincial life". This critic compares the novel to "a work of the ancient Greek historianHerodotus", who is often described as "The Father of History".[2]

The fictional town of Middlemarch, North Loamshire, is probably based onCoventry, where Eliot had lived before moving to London. Like Coventry, Middlemarch is described as a silk-ribbon manufacturing town.[2][23]

The subtitle—"A Study of Provincial Life"—has been seen as significant. One critic views the unity ofMiddlemarchas achieved through "the fusion of the two senses of 'provincial'":[23]on the one hand it means geographically "all parts of the country except the capital"; and on the other, a person who is "unsophisticated" or "narrow-minded".[24]Carolyn Steedman links Eliot's emphasis on provincialism inMiddlemarchtoMatthew Arnold's discussion ofsocial classin England inCulture and Anarchyessays, published in 1869, about the time Eliot began working on the stories that becameMiddlemarch. There Arnold classes British society in terms of Barbarians (aristocrats and landed gentry), Philistines (urban middle class) and Populace (working class). Steedman suggestsMiddlemarch"is a portrait ofPhilistine Provincialism".[2]

It is worth noting that Eliot went to London, as her heroine Dorothea does at the end of the book. There Eliot achieved fame way beyond most women of her time, whereas Dorothea takes on the role of nurturing Will and her family. Eliot was rejected by her family once she had settled in her common-law relationship with Lewes, and "their profound disapproval prevented her ever going home again". She omitted Coventry from her last visit tothe Midlandsin 1855.[2]

Central toMiddlemarchis the idea that Dorothea Brooke cannot hope to achieve the heroic stature of a figure likeSaint Teresa, for Eliot's heroine lives at the wrong time, "amidst the conditions of an imperfect social state, in which great feelings will often take the aspect of error, and great faith the aspect of illusion".[25]Antigone, a figure from Greek mythology best known fromSophocles' play, is given in the "Finale" as a further example of a heroic woman. The literary critic Kathleen Blake notes Eliot's emphasis on St Teresa's "very concrete accomplishment, the reform of a religious order", rather than her Christian mysticism.[26]A frequent criticism by feminist critics is that not only is Dorothea  less heroic than Saint Teresa and Antigone, but George Eliot herself.[27]In response,Ruth Yeazelland Kathleen Blake chide these critics for "expecting literary pictures of a strong woman succeeding in a period [around 1830] that did not make them likely in life".[21]Eliot has also been criticised more widely for ending the novel with Dorothea marrying Will Ladislaw, someone so clearly her inferior.[28]The novelist Henry James describes Ladislaw as adilettantewho "has not the concentrated fervour essential in the man chosen by so nobly strenuous a heroine".[22]

Marriage is one of the major themes inMiddlemarch. According toGeorge Steiner, "both principal plots [those of Dorothea and Lydgate] are case studies of unsuccessful marriage".[18]This suggests that these "disastrous marriages" leave the lives of Dorothea and Lydgate unfulfilled.[29]This is arguably more the case with Lydgate than with Dorothea, who gains a second chance through her later marriage to Will Ladislaw, but a favourable interpretation of this marriage depends on the character of Ladislaw himself, whom numerous critics have viewed as Dorothea's inferior.[30]In addition, there is the "meaningless and blissful" marriage of Dorothea's sister Celia Brooke to Sir James Chettam, and more significantly Fred Vincy's courting of Mary Garth. In the latter, Mary Garth will not accept Fred until he abandons the Church and settles on a more suitable career. Here Fred resemblesHenry Fielding's characterTom Jones, both being moulded into a good husband by the love they give to and receive from a woman.[31]

Dorothea is a St Teresa, born in the wrong century, in provincial Middlemarch, who mistakes in her idealistic ardor, "a poor dry mummified pedant... as a sort of angel of vocation".[32]Middlemarchis in part aBildungsromanfocusing on the psychological or moral growth of the protagonist: Dorothea "blindly gropes forward, making mistakes in her sometimes foolish, often egotistical, but also admirably idealistic attempt to find a role" or vocation that fulfils her nature.[33]Lydgate is equally mistaken in his choice of a partner, as his idea of a perfect wife is someone "who can sing and play the piano and provide a soft cushion for her husband to rest after work". So he marries Rosamond Vincy, "the woman in the novel who most contrasts with Dorothea", and thereby "deteriorates from ardent researcher to fashionable doctor in London".[33]

The Examiner,The SpectatorandAthenaeumreviewed each of the eight books that compriseMiddlemarchas they were published from December 1871 to December 1872;[34]such reviews speculated on the eventual direction of the plot and responded accordingly.[35]Contemporary response to the novel was mixed. Writing as it was being published, theSpectatorreviewer R. H. Hutton criticised it for what he saw as its melancholic quality.[36]Athenaeum, reviewing it after "serialisation", found the work overwrought and thought it would have benefited from hastier composition.[b][37]Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazinereviewer W. L. Collins saw as the work's most forceful impression its ability to make readers sympathise with the characters.[38]Edith Simcox ofAcademyoffered high praises, hailing it as a landmark in fiction owing to the originality of its form; she rated it first amongst Eliot's œuvre, which meant it "has scarcely a superior and very few equals in the whole wide range of English fiction".[39]

Henry James presented a mixed opinion,Middlemarch, according to him, was "at once one of the strongest and one of the weakest of English novels ...Middlemarchis a treasure-house of details, but it is an indifferent whole". Among the details, his greatest criticism ("the only eminent failure in the book") was of the character of Ladislaw, who he felt was an insubstantial hero-figure as against Lydgate. The scenes between Lydgate and Rosamond he especially praised for their psychological depth – he doubted whether there were any scenes "more powerfully real... [or] intelligent" in all English fiction.[22]Thérèse Bentzon, for theRevue des deux Mondes, was critical ofMiddlemarch. Although finding merit in certain scenes and qualities, she faulted its structure as "made up of a succession of unconnected chapters, following each other at random... The final effect is one of an incoherence which nothing can justify." In her view, Eliot's prioritisation of "observation rather than imagination... inexorable analysis rather than sensibility, passion or fantasy" means that she should not be held amongst the first ranks of novelists.[41]The German philosopherFriedrich Nietzsche, who readMiddlemarchin a translation owned by his mother and sister, derided the novel for construing suffering as a means of expiating the debt of sin, which he found characteristic of "little moralistic females à la Eliot".[42]

Despite the divided contemporary response,Middlemarchgained immediate admirers: in 1873, the poetEmily Dickinsonexpressed high praise for the novel, exclaiming in a letter to a friend: "What do I think ofMiddlemarch? What do I think of glory."[43][44][45]