Clarissa Dalloway goes aroundLondonin the morning, getting ready to host a party that evening. The nice day reminds her of her youth spent in the countryside inBourtonand makes her wonder about her choice of husband; she had married the reliable, successful, Richard Dalloway instead of the enigmatic and demanding Peter Walsh. She "had not the option" to be with a female romantic interest, Sally Seton. Peter reintroduces these conflicts by paying a visit that morning. Peter's visit made it clear that he was still in love with Clarissa (despite mention of his new love interest, Daisy), and Clarissa expressed her desire for Peter to take her away. Clarissa additionally invites Peter to her party that evening.

Septimus Warren Smith, aFirst World Warveteran suffering fromdeferred traumatic stress, spends his day in the park with his Italian-born wife Lucrezia, who experiences majorlonelinessas a result of her husband's isolating illness. His going to war affected not only his ability to function, but Lucrezia's as well. Septimus is now visited by frequent and indecipherablehallucinations, mostly concerning his dear friend Evans, whom he had unresolved unrequited sexual feelings towards, and who died in thewar; otherwise Septimus seems to be unable to feel emotions for anyone, even his wife. Septimus's relationship with his physicians, Sir William Bradshaw and Dr Holmes, is extremely poor. He fears for his safety in the presence of both doctors and often questions human nature after their interactions. As a result of hisinvoluntary commitmentto apsychiatric hospitalhetakes his own life by jumping out of a window.

Clarissa's party in the evening is a slow success. It is attended by most of the characters she has met throughout the book, including Sally, Peter, and others from her past. Clarissa discovers that Sally, whom she has not seen for several decades, and who used to be a free-spirited tomboy, has become a respectable, matronly mother to five boys.

The novel ends with Clarissa hearing about Septimus's suicide at the party and gradually coming to admire this stranger's act, which she considers an effort to preserve the purity of his happiness. Clarissa also acknowledges her ability to relate to Septimus regardless of her limited knowledge of him.

InMrs Dalloway, all of the action, aside from theflashbacks, takes place on a day in "the middle of June" of 1923. It is an example ofstream of consciousnessstorytelling: every scene closely tracks the momentary thoughts of a particular character. Woolf blurs the distinction betweendirectandindirect speechthroughout the novel, freely alternating hermode of narrationbetweenomniscient description,indirectinterior monologue, andsoliloquy.[9]The narration follows at least twenty characters in this way, but the bulk of the novel is spent with Clarissa Dalloway, Peter Walsh, and Septimus Smith.

Woolf laid out some of her literary goals with the characters ofMrs Dallowaywhile still working on the novel. A year before its publication, she gave a talk at Cambridge University called "Character in Fiction", revised and retitled later that year as "Mr. Bennett and Mrs. Brown".[10]

Mrs Dallowayis commonly thought to be a response toJames Joyce'sUlysses. Both novels use the stream of consciousness technique to follow the thoughts of two characters, one older and one younger, during one day in a bustling city.[11]Woolf herself, writing in 1928, denied any deliberate "method" to the book, saying instead that the structure came about "without any conscious direction".[12]In her essay "Modern Fiction", Woolf praisedUlysses, writing of the chapter set at the cemetery ("Hades") that, "on a first reading at any rate, it is difficult not to acclaim a masterpiece".[13]However, Woolf's private writings throughout her first reading ofUlyssesabound in hostile criticisms, as in this passage:

Woolf's disdain for Joyce's book only solidified after she finished reading it. She summed up her thoughts on the work as a whole:

TheHogarth Press, run by her and her husbandLeonard, had to turn down the chance to publishUlyssesin 1919 because of the obscenity law in England, as well as the practical issues regarding publishing such a substantial text.[16]

The novel has two main narrative lines involving two separate characters (Clarissa Dalloway and Septimus Smith); within each narrative there is a particular time and place in the past that the main characters keep returning to in their minds. For Clarissa, her charmed youth at Bourton keeps intruding into her thoughts on this day in London. For Septimus, his time as a soldier during the "Great War" keeps intruding, especially in the form of Evans, his fallen comrade. Other characters, such as Peter Walsh, also find themselves returning to moments in their past.[17]