Crisóstomo Ibarra, themestizoson of the recently deceased Don Rafael Ibarra, is returning to the town of San Diego inLagunaafter seven years of study inEurope. Kapitán Tiago, a family friend, invites him to a reunion party inManila. At the party, Crisóstomo meets Padre Dámaso who was San Diego's parish priest when Crisóstomo left for Europe. Dámaso treats Crisóstomo with hostility, to the surprise of the young man who regarded the priest as his father's friend. Later, as Crisóstomo was walking back to his hotel, Lieutenant Guevara, another friend of his father, informs him that Don Rafael may have been killed for political reasons and Dámaso may have been involved. Guevara warns him to be careful.

The following day, Crisóstomo returns to Tiago's home to meet with his childhood sweetheart, Tiago's daughter María Clara. As the two flirt and reminisce, María reads back to him a part of his farewell letter on his discussion with his father about the state of the country. Ibarra excuses himself eventually as it was time to go to San Diego.

Arriving in San Diego, Crisóstomo goes to the cemetery and finds his father's grave desecrated. He seeks out the gravedigger who then tells him that the parish priest had ordered Don Rafael's remains transferred to the Chinese cemetery, but that he threw the corpse into the lake instead out of fear and pity. At that moment, the town's new parish priest, Padre Bernardo Salví, passes by wherein an enraged Crisóstomo pushes him to the ground, demanding an explanation; a fearful Salví states that he was only newly assigned to the town but reveals that Padre Dámaso ordered the transfer.

Crisóstomo decides to forgive and commits to improvements in his town. He plans to build a private school, believing that hispaisanoswould benefit from a more modern education than what is offered in thegovernment schools, which were under the influence of the friars. Enjoying widespread support from the locals andSpanish authorities, Crisóstomo's project advances quickly. He receives counsel from Don Anastacio, a local philosopher, and recruits a progressive schoolmaster. Construction was set to begin shortly with thecornerstoneto be laid in a few weeks during San Diego's town fiesta.

One day, Crisóstomo, María and their friends go on a picnic along the shores of theLaguna de Baý. They discover that a crocodile had been lurking in the Ibarras' fish pens. The boatman jumps into the water with aknifedrawn. Crisóstomo follows him and the two subdue the animal together. Elías, the boatman, proclaims himself indebted to Crisóstomo.

On the day of the fiesta, Elías warns Crisóstomo of a plot to kill him at the cornerstone ceremony. Sure enough, Crisóstomo evades injury and the would-be assassin is killed. During the luncheon, an uninvited Padre Dámaso further berates Crisóstomo. The other guests hiss for discretion, but Dámaso carries on and insults the memory of Don Rafael. Crisóstomo then loses control, strikes the friar unconscious and holds a knife to his neck. Crisóstomo tells the guests about Dámaso's schemes that resulted in his father's death, but releases Dámaso when María Clara pleads for mercy. Crisóstomo isexcommunicatedfrom the Church, but has it lifted in Manila through the intercession of the sympathetic captain-general. Returning to San Diego, he finds María ill and refusing to see him.

Meanwhile, Elías senses Crisóstomo's influence with the government and takes him for a sail so they can talk in private. Elías reveals that arevolutionary grouphad been trying to recruit him but he stalled in order to get Crisóstomo's views first. The conversation shifts to Elías' family history. It turns out that Elías' grandfather, in his youth, worked as a bookkeeper in a Manila office, but one night a fire consumes the office and the Spanish proprietor accuses him of arson. He was prosecuted and jailed; upon release, he was shunned by the community as a dangerous lawbreaker. His wife turned to prostitution to support the family. Their lives were ruined.

Crisóstomo says that he cannot help and his school project is his focus. Rebuffed, Elías advises Crisóstomo to avoid him in the future, for his own safety. However, Elías returns a few days later to tell him of a rogue uprising planned for that same night. The instigators hadused Crisóstomo's name in vainto recruit malcontents. The authorities know of the uprising and are prepared tospring a trapon the rebels. Realizing the scheme's repercussions, Crisóstomo abandons his school project and enlists Elías in sorting out and destroying documents that may implicate him. Elías obliges, but comes across a name familiar to him: Don Pedro Eibarramendia. Crisóstomo says Pedro was his great-grandfather and that they had to shorten his long family name. Elías responds that Eibarramendia was the same Spaniard who accused his grandfather of arson, and thus condemned Elías and his family to misfortune. Elias leaves the house in consternation.

The uprising takes place and many of the rebels are captured or killed. They point to Crisóstomo as instructed and he is arrested. The following morning, the instigators are found dead—Padre Salví, the mastermind of the uprising, ordered his senior sexton to kill them in order to silence them. Meanwhile, Elias sneaks back into the Ibarra mansion and sorts through documents and valuables, then burns down the house. Crisóstomo and his co-accused are loaded into horse carts and taken to prison with their townmates shouting in anger and casting stones as they passed.

Kapitán Tiago later on hosts a dinner at his riverside house in Manila to celebrate María Clara's engagement with Alfonso Linares, a Peninsular who was presented as her new suitor following Crisóstomo's excommunication. Present at the party were Padre Salví, Padre Sibyla, Lieutenant Guevarra, and other acquaintances. They spoke of the events in San Diego and Crisóstomo's fate. Salví, who lusted after María Clara all along and staged the uprising in order to frame Crisóstomo, says he requested to be moved to the Convent of the Poor Clares in Manila under the pretense of the San Diego uprising being too much for him.

Guevara outlines how the court came to condemn Crisóstomo. In a signed letter he wrote before leaving for Europe, Crisóstomo spoke of his father, an alleged rebel who died in prison. Somehow this letter fell into the hands of an enemy, and Crisóstomo's handwriting was copied to create recruitment letters for the uprising. The signature on the letters was similar to Crisóstomo's seven years before, but not at present day. Crisóstomo only had to deny ownership of the signature on the original letter and the case built on the bogus letters would be dismissed. But upon seeing the letter, which was of course his farewell letter to María Clara, Crisóstomo lost the will to fight the charges, and he is sentenced to bedeported. Guevara then approaches María who had been listening. Privately but sorrowfully, he congratulates her for her common sense in yielding the letter. Now, she can live a life of peace. María is devastated.

Later that evening Crisóstomo, having escaped prison with the help of Elías, confronts María in secret. María admits giving up his letter because Salví found Dámaso's old letters in the San Diego parsonage, letters from María's mother who was then pregnant with her and begging Dámaso for an abortion. It turns out that Dámaso was María's biological father. Salvípromisednot to divulge Dámaso's letters in exchange for Crisóstomo's farewell letter. Crisóstomo forgives her, María swears her undying love, and they part with a kiss.

Crisóstomo and Elías slip unnoticed through the Estero de Binondo and into thePasig River. Elías tells Crisóstomo that his family treasure is buried at the Ibarra forest in San Diego. Wishing to make restitution, Crisóstomo tells Elías to flee with him to a foreign country where they will live as brothers. Elías declines, stating that his fate lies with the country he wishes to reform. Crisóstomo then tells him of his own desire for revolution to lengths that even Elías was unwilling to go. Just then, sentries catch up with their boat at the mouth of the Pasig River and pursue them across Laguna de Bay. Elías orders Crisóstomo to lie down and to meet him at his family's mausoleum in the forest. Elías then jumps into the water to distract the pursuers and is shot several times.

The following day, María reads in the newspapers that Crisóstomo had been killed by sentries in pursuit. She remorsefully demands of Dámaso that her wedding with Linares be cancelled and that she be entered into the cloister, or the grave. Seeing her resolution, Dámaso admits he ruined Crisóstomo because he was a meremestizoand Dámaso wanted María to be happy and secure, and that was possible only if she married apeninsular Spaniard. Knowing why Salví had earlier requested to be assigned to the Convent of the Poor Clares, Dámaso pleads with María to reconsider, but to no avail. Weeping, Dámaso consents, knowing the horrible fate that awaits his daughter within the convent but finding it more tolerable than her suicide.

A few nights later in the Ibarra forest, a boy pursues his mother through the darkness. The woman went insane with the constant beating of her husband, the death of her younger son in the hands of Padre Salví, and the loss of her elder son to theGuardia Civil. Basilio, the boy, catches up with Sisa, his mother, inside the Ibarra mausoleum, but the strain had already been too great for Sisa. She dies in Basilio's embrace. As Basilio grieves for his mother, Elías stumbles into the mausoleum, himself dying from his wounds. He instructs Basilio to cremate their bodies and if no one comes, to dig inside the mausoleum, where he will find treasures, which he is to use for his own education.

As Basilio leaves to fetch the wood, Elías sinks to the ground and whispers that he will die without seeing the dawn of freedom for his people, and that those who see it must welcome it and not forget those who died in the darkness. Upon returning, Basilio encounters Ibarra also mourning for Elias. The two build a pyre for them before burying their remains. Following the funeral, Ibarra and Basilio dig the mausoleum for the treasures, which the latter receives a share of. Before letting Basilio leave, Ibarra re-echoes Elias' dying advice on the use of the treasures to the boy.

Afterwards, it is revealed that Dámaso is transferred to a remote town; distraught, he is found dead a day later. Tiago fell into depression, became addicted to opium and faded to obscurity. Salví, while waiting for his consecration as abishop, serves as chaplain of the Convent of the Poor Clares. Meanwhile, during a stormy evening in September, two patrolmen reported seeing aspecteron the roof of the convent weeping in despair. The next day, a government representative visited the convent to try to investigate the previous night's events. One of the nuns had a wet and torn gown and with tears told the representative of "tales of horror" and begged for "protection against the outrages of hypocrisy" (strongly suggesting that Padre Salví regularly rapes her when he is in the convent). Theabbess, however, said that she was mad. A general also attempted to investigate the nun's case but by then, the abbess prohibited visits to the convent. Nothing more was said about this nun, or for that matter, María Clara.

Rizal finished the novel in March 1887. At first, according to one of Rizal's biographers, Rizal feared the novel might not be printed, and that it would remain unread.[citation needed]He was struggling with financial constraints at the time and thought it would be hard to pursue printing the novel.

His friendMáximo Violaprovided some financial aid, enabling Rizal to have the book printed at Berliner Buchdruckerei-Aktiengesellschaft inBerlin. Viola loaned Rizal₱300 for 2,000 copies. The printing was finished earlier than the estimated five months. Viola arrived inBerlinin December 1886, and by March 21, 1887, Rizal had sent a copy of the novel to his friend,Ferdinand Blumentritt.[6]

Spanish authorities in the Philippines banned the book, but copies were smuggled into the country. The first Philippine edition (and the second published edition) was printed in 1899 in Manila by Chofre y Compania in Escolta.

On August 21, 2007, a 480-page English-language version ofNoli Me Tángerewas released to major Australian book stores.Penguin Classics(animprintbyPenguin Books) published this edition in keeping with its "commitment to publish the major literary classics of the world."[7]

American writerHarold Augenbraum, who first readNoliin 1992, had translated the novel. A writer well-acquainted with translating otherSpanish-languageliterary works, Augenbraum proposed to translate the novel. Penguin changed their initial plan of adapting existing English versions and instead commissioned him to make a new translation.[7]

This novel and its sequel,El filibusterismo(nicknamedEl fili), were banned by Spanish authorities in the Philippines because of their allegations of corruption and abuse by the colonial government and the Catholic Church. Copies of the book were nevertheless smuggled in and hidden, and when Rizal returned to the Philippines after completing medical studies, he quickly ran afoul of the local government. A few days after his arrival, Rizal was summoned toMalacañan Palaceby Governor-GeneralEmilio Terrero, who told him of the charge thatNoli Me Tángerecontained subversive elements. After a discussion, Terrero was appeased but still unable to offer resistance to pressure from the Church against the book. The persecution can be discerned from Rizal's letter toFerdinand Blumentritt:

Rizal was exiled toDapitaninMindanao, then later arrested for "inciting rebellion" based largely on his writings. Rizal was executed byfiring squadat Bagumbayan outside Manila's walls on December 30, 1896, at the age of thirty-five, at thepark that now bears his name.

Rizal depicted nationality by emphasizing the positive qualities of Filipinos: the devotion of a Filipina and her influence on a man's life, the deep sense of gratitude, and the solid common sense of the Filipinos under the Spanish regime.

The work was instrumental in creating a unifiedFilipino national identityand consciousness, as many natives previously identified with their respective regions. Itlampooned, caricatured and exposed various elements in colonial society. Two characters in particular have become classics in Filipino culture: María Clara, who has become apersonificationof the ideal Filipino woman, loving and unwavering in her loyalty to her spouse; and the priest Father Dámaso, who reflects thecovert fathering of illegitimate children by members of the Spanish clergy.[8]

The book indirectly influenced thePhilippine Revolutionof independence from the Spanish Empire, even though Rizal actually advocated direct representation to the Spanish government and an overall larger role for the Philippines within Spain's political affairs. In 1956,CongresspassedRepublic Act 1425, more popularly known as theRizal Law, which requires all levels in Philippine schools to teach the novel as part of their curriculum.Noli Me Tángereis being taught to third-year secondary school (now Grade 9, due to the new K-12 curriculum) students, while its sequelEl Filibusterismois being taught for fourth-year secondary school (now Grade 10) students. The novels are incorporated to their study and survey ofPhilippine literature.[9]Both of Rizal's novels were initially banned from Catholic educational institutions given its negative portrayal of the Church, but this taboo has been largely superseded as religious schools conformed to the Rizal Law.[10]

DonJuan Crisóstomo Eibarramendia y Magsalin, commonly referred to in the novel as Ibarra or Crisóstomo, is the novel's protagonist. Themestizo(mixed-race) son of Filipino businessmanDonRafael Ibarra, he studied in Europe for seven years.[11][12]Ibarra is also María Clara's fiancé.

María Clara de los Santos y Alba, commonly referred to as María Clara, María, or Clarita, is Ibarra's fiancée and the most beautiful and widely celebrated girl in San Diego.[13]She was raised by Kapitán Tiago de los Santos, and his cousin, Isabel. In the later parts of the novel, she was revealed to be an illegitimate daughter of Father Dámaso, the formercurateof the town, and Doña Pía Alba, Kapitán Tiago's wife, who haddied giving birthto María Clara.[14]

At the novel's end, a heartbroken yet resolved María Clara entered the Real Monasterio de Santa Clara (aPoor Clarenunnery) after learning the truth of her parentage and mistakenly believing that her lover, Crisóstomo, had been killed. In the epilogue, Rizal stated that it is unknown whether María Clara is still living within the walls of the convent or is already dead.[15]

DonSantiago de los Santos, known by his nickname Tiyago and political title Kapitán Tiyago, is said to be the richest man in the region ofBinondoand possessed real properties inPampangaandLaguna de Baý. He is also said to be a good Catholic, a friend of the Spanish government and thus was considered a Spaniard by the colonial elite. Kapitán Tiyago never attended school, so he became thedomestic helperof aDominicanfriarwho gave him an informal education. He later married Pía Alba fromSanta Cruz.[13]