Oedipus, King of Thebes, sends his brother-in-law,Creon, to ask the advice of the oracle atDelphi, concerning a plague ravaging Thebes. Creon returns to report that the plague is the result of religious pollution, since the murderer of their former king,Laius, has never been caught. Oedipus vows to find the murderer and curses him for causing the plague.

Oedipus summons the blind prophetTiresiasfor help.  Tiresias admits to knowing the answers to Oedipus's questions, but he refuses to speak, instead telling Oedipus to abandon his search. Angered by the seer's reply, Oedipus accuses him of complicity in Laius's murder. The offended Tiresias then reveals to the king that "you yourself are the criminal you seek". Oedipus does not understand how this could be, and supposes that Creon must have paid Tiresias to accuse him. The two argue vehemently, as Oedipus mocks Tiresias's lack of sight, and Tiresias retorts that Oedipus himself is blind. Eventually, the prophet leaves, muttering darkly that when the murderer is discovered, he shall be a native of Thebes, brother and father to his own children, and son and husband to his own mother.

Creon arrives to face Oedipus's accusations. The King demands that Creon be executed; however, thechoruspersuades him to let Creon live.Jocasta, wife of first Laius and then Oedipus, enters and attempts to comfort Oedipus, telling him he should take no notice of prophets. As proof, she recounts an incident in which she and Laius received anoraclewhich never came true. The prophecy stated that Laius would be killed by his own son; instead, Laius was killed by bandits, at afork in the road(τριπλαῖς ἁμαξιτοῖς, triplais amaxitois).

The mention of the place causes Oedipus to pause and ask for more details. Jocasta specifies the branch toDaulison the way toDelphi. Recalling Tiresias's words, he asks Jocasta to describe Laius. The king then sends for a shepherd, the only surviving witness of the attack to be brought from his fields to the palace.

Confused, Jocasta asks Oedipus what the matter is, and he tells her. Many years ago, at a banquet in Corinth, a man drunkenly accused Oedipus of not being his father's son. Oedipus went to Delphi and asked the oracle about his parentage. Instead of answering his question directly, the oracle prophesied that he would one day murder his father and sleep with his mother. Upon hearing this, Oedipus resolved never to return to Corinth. In his travels, he came to the very crossroads where Laius had been killed, and encountered a carriage that attempted to drive him off the road. An argument ensued, and Oedipus killed the travelers—including a man who matched Jocasta's description of Laius. However, Oedipus holds out hope that he was not Laius's killer, because Laius was said to have been murdered byseveralrobbers. If the shepherd confirms that Laius was attacked by many men, then Oedipus will be in the clear.

A man arrives fromCorinthwith the message thatPolybus, who raised Oedipus as his son, has died. To the surprise of the messenger, Oedipus is overjoyed, because he can no longer kill his father, thus disproving half of the oracle's prophecy. However, he still fears that he might somehow commit incest with his mother.  Eager to set the king's mind at ease, the messenger tells him not to worry, because Merope is not his real mother.

The messenger explains that years earlier, while tending his flock onMount Cithaeron, a shepherd from the household of Laius brought him an infant that he was instructed to dispose of.  The messenger had then given the child to Polybus, who raised him. Oedipus asks the chorus if anyone knows the identity of the other shepherd, or where he might be now. They respond that he is the same shepherd who witnessed the murder of Laius, and whom Oedipus had already sent for. Jocasta, realizing the truth, desperately begs Oedipus to stop asking questions.  When Oedipus refuses, the queen runs into the palace.

When the shepherd arrives, Oedipus questions him, but he begs to be allowed to leave without answering further. However, Oedipus presses him, finally threatening him with torture or execution. It emerges that the child he gave away was Laius's own son.  In fear of a prophecy that the child would kill his father, Jocasta gave her son to the shepherd in order to beexposedupon the mountainside.

Everything is at last revealed, and Oedipus curses himself and fate before leaving the stage. The chorus laments how even a great man can be felled by fate, and following this, a servant exits the palace to speak of what has happened inside. Jocasta hashanged herselfin her bedchamber. Entering the palace in anguish, Oedipus called on his servants to bring him a sword, that he might slay Jocasta with his own hand. But upon discovering the lifeless queen, Oedipus took her down, and removing the long gold pins from her dress, he gouged out his own eyes in despair.

The blinded king now exits the palace, and begs to beexiled. Creon enters, saying that Oedipus shall be taken into the house until oracles can be consulted regarding what is best to be done. Oedipus's two daughters (and half-sisters),AntigoneandIsmene, are sent out and Oedipus laments their having been born to such a cursed family. He begs Creon to watch over them, in hopes that they will live where there is opportunity for them, and to have a better life than their father. Creon agrees, before sending Oedipus back into the palace.

On an empty stage, the chorus repeats the common Greekmaximthat "no man should be considered fortunate until he is dead."[11]

The two cities ofTroyandThebeswere the major focus of Greekepic poetry. The events surrounding theTrojan Warwere chronicled in theEpic Cycle, of which much remains, and those about Thebes in theTheban Cycle, which have been lost. The Theban Cycle recounted the sequence of tragedies that befell the house ofLaius, of which the story of Oedipus is a part.

Homer'sOdyssey(XI.271ff.) contains the earliest account of the Oedipus myth whenOdysseusencounters Jocasta (named Epicaste) in theunderworld. Homer briefly summarises the story of Oedipus, including the incest, patricide, and Jocasta's subsequent suicide. However, in the Homeric version, Oedipus remains King of Thebes after the revelation and neither blinds himself, nor is sent into exile. In particular, it is said that the gods made the matter of his paternity known, whilst inOedipus the King, Oedipus very much discovers the truth himself.[12]

In 467 BC, Sophocles's fellow tragedianAeschyluswon first prize at theCity Dionysiawith a trilogy about the House of Laius, comprisingLaius,OedipusandSeven Against Thebes(the only play which survives). Since he did not write connected trilogies as Aeschylus did,Oedipus Rexfocuses on the titular character while hinting at the larger myth obliquely, which was already known to the audience in Athens at the time.

The trilogy containingOedipus Rextook second prize in theCity Dionysiaat its original performance. Aeschylus's nephewPhiloclestook first prize at that competition.[13]However, in hisPoetics,AristotleconsideredOedipus Rexto be the tragedy which best matched his prescription for how drama should be made.[14]

Many modern critics agree with Aristotle on the quality ofOedipus Rex, even if they don't always agree on the reasons. For example,Richard Claverhouse Jebbclaimed that "TheOedipus Tyrannusis in one sense the masterpiece of Attic tragedy. No other shows an equal degree of art in the development of the plot; and this excellence depends on the powerful and subtle drawing of the characters."[15]Cedric Whitmannoted that "theOedipus Rexpasses almost universally for the greatest extant Greek play".[16]Whitman himself regarded the play as "the fullest expression of this conception of tragedy," that is the conception of tragedy as a "revelation of the evil lot of man," where a man may have "all the equipment for glory and honor" but still have "the greatest effort to do good" end in "the evil of an unbearable self for which one is not responsible."[17]Edith Hallreferred toOedipus the Kingas "this definitive tragedy" and notes that "the magisterial subtlety of Sophocles' characterization thus lend credibility to the breathtaking coincidences," and notes the irony that "Oedipus can only fulfill his exceptional god-ordained destiny because Oedipus is a preeminently capable and intelligent human being."[18]H. D. F. Kittosaid aboutOedipus Rexthat "it is true to say that the perfection of its form implies a world order," although Kitto notes that whether or not that world order "is beneficent, Sophocles does not say."[19]

The science revolution attributed toThalesbegan gaining political force, and this play offered a warning to the new thinkers. Kitto interprets the play as Sophocles's retort to thesophists, by dramatizing a situation in which humans face undeserved suffering through no fault of their own, but despite the apparent randomness of the events, the fact that they have been prophesied by the gods implies that the events are not random, despite the reasons being beyond human comprehension.[20]Through the play, according to Kitto, Sophocles declares "that it is wrong, in the face of the incomprehensible and unmoral, to deny the moral laws and accept chaos. What is right is to recognize facts and not delude ourselves. The universe is a unity; if, sometimes, we can see neither rhyme nor reason in it we should not suppose it is random. There is so much that we cannot know and cannot control that we should not think and behave as if we do know and can control."[20]

Oedipus Rexis widely regarded as one of the greatest plays, stories, and tragedies ever written.[21][22]The Guardian'stheatre criticMichael Billingtonincluded it in his list of the 101 greatest plays ever written.[23]

Fateis a motif that often occurs in Greek writing, tragedies in particular. Likewise, where the attempt to avoid an oracle is the very thing that enables it to happen is common to many Greek myths. For example, similarities to Oedipus can be seen in the myth ofPerseus'sbirth.

Two oracles in particular dominate the plot ofOedipus Rex. Jocasta relates the prophecy that was told toLaiusbefore the birth of Oedipus (lines 711–4):

The oracle told to Laius tells only of thepatricide, whereas theincestis missing. Prompted by Jocasta's recollection, Oedipus reveals the prophecy which caused him to leaveCorinth(lines 791–3):