Roderigo, a wealthy and dissolute gentleman, complains to his friend Iago, anensign, that Iago has not told him about the recent secret marriage between Desdemona, the daughter of Brabantio, a senator, and Othello, aMoorishgeneral in the Venetian army. Roderigo is upset because he loves Desdemona and had asked her father, Brabantio, for her hand in marriage, which Brabantio denied him.

Iago hates Othello for promoting an aristocrat named Cassio above him, whom Iago considers a less capable soldier than himself. Iago tells Roderigo that he plans to exploit Othello for his own advantage and convinces Roderigo to wake Brabantio and tell him about his daughter'selopement. Meanwhile, Iago sneaks away to find Othello and warns him that Brabantio is coming for him.

Brabantio, provoked by Roderigo, is enraged and seeks to confront Othello, but he finds Othello accompanied by the Duke of Venice's guards, who prevent violence. News has arrived in Venice thatthe Turks are going to attack Cyprus, and Othello is therefore summoned to advise the senators. Brabantio has no option but to accompany Othello to the Duke's residence, where he accuses Othello of seducing Desdemona bywitchcraft.

Othello defends himself before theDuke of Venice, Brabantio's kinsmen Lodovico and Gratiano, and various senators. Othello explains that, while he was invited to Brabantio's home, Desdemona became enamoured of him for the sad and compelling stories he told of his life before Venice, not because of any witchcraft. The senate is satisfied once Desdemona confirms that she loves Othello, but Brabantio leaves, saying that Desdemona will betray Othello: "Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see. She has deceived her father, and may thee" (Act I, Sc 3). Iago, still in the room, takes note of Brabantio's remark. By order of the Duke, Othello leaves Venice to command the Venetian armies against invading Turks on the island ofCyprus, accompanied by his new wife, his new lieutenant Cassio, his ensign Iago, and Iago's wife, Emilia, as Desdemona's attendant.

The party arrives in Cyprus to find that a storm has destroyed the Turkish fleet. Othello orders a general celebration and leaves to consummate his marriage with Desdemona. In his absence, Iago gets Cassio drunk and then persuades Roderigo to draw Cassio into a fight. Montano tries to calm down an angry and drunk Cassio. This leads to their fighting one another and Montano's being injured. Othello arrives and questions the men as to what happened. Othello blames Cassio for the disturbance and strips him of his rank. Cassio, distraught, is then persuaded by Iago to ask Desdemona to persuade her husband to reinstate him.

Iago persuades Othello to be suspicious of Cassio and Desdemona's relationship. When Desdemona drops ahandkerchief(the first gift given to her by Othello), Emilia finds it and gives it to Iago at his request, unaware of what he plans to do with it. Othello appears and, then being convinced by Iago of his wife's unfaithfulness with his captain, vows with Iago for the death of Desdemona and Cassio, after which he makes Iago his lieutenant.

Iago plants the handkerchief in Cassio's lodgings, then tells Othello to watch Cassio's reactions while Iago questions him. Iago goads Cassio on to talk about his affair with Bianca, a local courtesan, but whispers her name so quietly that Othello believes the two men are talking about Desdemona. Later, Bianca accuses Cassio of giving her a second-hand gift which he had received from another lover. Othello sees this, and Iago convinces him that Cassio received the handkerchief from Desdemona.

Enraged and hurt, Othello resolves to kill his wife and tells Iago to kill Cassio. Othello proceeds to make Desdemona's life miserable and strikes her in front of visiting Venetian nobles. Meanwhile, Roderigo complains that he has received no results from Iago in return for his money and efforts to win Desdemona, but Iago convinces him to kill Cassio.

Roderigo unsuccessfully attacks Cassio in the street after Cassio leaves Bianca's lodgings, as Cassio wounds Roderigo. During the scuffle, Iago comes from behind Cassio and badly cuts his leg. In the darkness, Iago manages to hide his identity, and when Lodovico and Gratiano hear Cassio's cries for help, Iago joins them. When Cassio identifies Roderigo as one of his attackers, Iago secretly stabs Roderigo to death to stop him from revealing the plot. Iago then accuses Bianca of the failed conspiracy to kill Cassio.

Othello confronts a sleeping Desdemona. She denies being unfaithful, but he smothers her. Emilia arrives, and Desdemona defends her husband before dying, and Othello accuses Desdemona of adultery. Emilia calls for help. The former governor Montano arrives with Gratiano and Iago. When Othello mentions the handkerchief as proof, Emilia realizes what Iago has done, and she exposes him. Othello, belatedly realising Desdemona's innocence, stabs Iago (but not fatally), saying that Iago is a devil, but not before the latter stabs Emilia to death in the scuffle.

Iago refuses to explain his motives, vowing to remain silent from that moment on. Lodovico apprehends both Iago and Othello for the murders of Roderigo, Emilia, and Desdemona, but Othello commits suicide. Lodovico appoints Cassio as Othello's successor and exhorts him to punish Iago justly. He then denounces Iago for his actions and leaves to tell the others what has happened.

Shakespeare's primary source for the plot was the story of a Moorish Captain (third decade, story seven) inGli HecatommithibyCinthio(Giovanni Battista Giraldi), a collection of one hundrednovellasabout love, grouped into ten "decades" by theme.[1]The third decade deals with marital infidelity.[2]Of Cinthio's characters, only Disdemona (the equivalent of Shakespeare's Desdemona – her name means "ill-omened" in Italian) is named – the others are simply called the Moor (the equivalent of Othello), the Ensign (Iago), the Corporal (Cassio) and similar descriptions.[3][4]In its story the Ensign falls in love with the Moor's wife Disdemona, but her indifference turns his love to hate and in revenge he persuades the Moor that Disdemona has been unfaithful. The Moor and the Ensign murder Disdemona with socks filled with sand, and bring down the ceiling of her bedchamber to make it appear an accident. The story continues until the Ensign is tortured to death for unrelated reasons and the Moor is killed by Disdemona's family.[3][a]

Shakespeare's direct sources for the story do not include any threat of warfare: it seems to have been Shakespeare's innovation to set the story at the time of a threatened Turkish invasion of Cyprus—apparently fixing it inthe events of 1570. Those historical events would however have been well known to Shakespeare's original audience, who would therefore have been aware that—contrary to the action of the play—the Turks took Cyprus, and still held it.[5][6]

Scholars have identified many other influences onOthello. Works which are not themselves sources but whose impact on Shakespeare can be identified in the play[7]includeVirgil'sAeneid,[8]Ovid'sMetamorphoses,[9]bothThe Merchant's TaleandThe Miller's TalefromChaucer'sThe Canterbury Tales,[10]Geoffrey Fenton'sCertaine Tragicall Discourses,[11][12]Kyd'sThe Spanish Tragedy,[13]George Peele'sThe Battle of Alcazar,[14][15]the anonymousArden of Faversham,[16][17]Marlowe'sDoctor Faustus,[18]andHeywood'sA Woman Killed with Kindness.[19]Influences also include Shakespeare's own earlier playsMuch Ado About Nothing, in which a similar plot was used in a comedy,[20]The Merchant of Venicewith its high-born, Moorish, Prince of Morocco,[21]andTitus Andronicus, in which a Moor, Aaron, was a prominent villain, and as such was a forerunner of both Othello and Iago.[22][23][24]

One such influence is not a literary work at all. In 1600, London was visited for "half a year" by the Moorish ambassador of the King of Barbary, whose entourage caused a stir in the city.Shakespeare's companyis known to have played at court during the time of the visit, and so would have encountered the foreign visitors at first hand.[25]

Among Shakespeare's non-fiction, or partly-fictionalised, sources wereGasparo Contarini'sCommonwealth and Government of Venice[26][27]andLeo Africanus'sA Geographical Historie of Africa.[28][29][30]Himself a Moor from Barbary, Leo said of his own people "they are so credulous they will beleeue matters impossible, which are told them" and "no nation in the world is so subject vnto iealousie; for they will rather [lose] their liues than put vp any disgrace in the behalfe of their women"—both traits seen in Shakespeare's Othello.[31]And from Leo's own life story Shakespeare took a well-born, educated African finding a place at the height of a white European power.[30]FromPhilemon Holland's translation ofPliny'sNatural HistoryShakespeare took the references to the Pontic Sea,[32]to Arabian trees with their medicinable gum,[33]and to the "Anthropophagi and men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders",[34][35]elements which also featured in the fantasticThe Travels of Sir John Mandeville.[12][36]

Theterminus ad quemforOthello(that is, the latest year in which the play could have been written) is 1604, since a performance of the play in that year is mentioned in the accounts book ofSir Edmund Tilney, thenMaster of the Revels.[37][38]

Aterminus a quo(i.e. the earliest year in which it could have been written) is given by the fact that one of its sources,Holland's translation ofPliny'sNatural History, was published in 1601.[37]

Within this range, scholars have tended to date the play 1603–1604, within the reign ofJames I, since the play appears to have elements designed to appeal to the new king, who had written a poem about the defeat of the Turkish navy atLepanto, and to the new queen,Anne of Denmark, in whose circle there was an interest in the blackface exoticism also reflected inBen Jonson'sThe Masque of Blackness, in which the queen and herladiesappeared as "daughters of Niger".[39]That dating is supported by similarities toMeasure for Measure, another of Shakespeare's plays often dated around 1604, and which, likeOthello, draws its plot fromCinthio'sGli Hecatommithi.[40]This date is also supported by the possibility that Shakespeare may have consultedRichard Knolles' 1603The Generall Historie of the Turkes.[40]

However, evidence of an earlier date, 1601–1602, is provided by the so-calledbad quartoof Shakespeare's playHamlet, published in 1603. The theory is that the bad quarto is a memorial reconstruction ofHamlet, made by some of its actors: so where there are unintentional echoes ofOthelloin the bad quarto (for example "to my vnfolding / Lend thy listning eare"[41]in the bad quarto and "To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear"[42]inOthello—and a number of others) it suggests that the actors must have been performingOthello, at the latest, in the season preceding the bad quarto's publication.[43]

Othellowas not published in Shakespeare's lifetime.[44]The first published version of the play was aquartoin 1622 (usually abbreviated to "Q"), which was followed a year later by the play's appearance in theFirst Folio(usually abbreviated to "F").[44]

There are significant differences between the two early editions, the most prominent of which are:

There is no scholarly consensus to account for the differences between Q and F:[49]

AsThe Oxford Shakespeareeditor Michael Neill summarises things: "The textual mystery ofOthellois unlikely ever to be resolved to general satisfaction."[56]

The influential early twentieth-century Shakespeare criticA. C. Bradleydefined Othello's tragic flaw as a sexual jealousy so intense that it "converts human nature into chaos, and liberates the beast in man ... the animal in man forcing itself into his consciousness in naked grossness, and he writhing before it but powerless to deny it entrance, grasping inarticulate images of pollution, and finding relief only in a bestial thirst for blood."[58]

This jealousy is symbolized in the play through animal imagery. In the early acts of the play it is Iago who mentions ass, daws, flies, ram, jennet, guinea-hen, baboon, wild-cat, snipe, monkeys, monster and wolves. But from the third act onwards Othello catches this line of imagery from Iago as his irrational jealousy takes hold.[59]The same occurs with "diabolical" imagery (i.e. images of hell and devils) of which Iago uses 14 of his 16 diabolical images in the first two acts, yet Othello uses 25 of his 26 in the last three acts.[60]

Not only Othello, but also Iago is consumed by jealousy: his is a kind of envy, which contemporary scholarFrancis Baconcalled "the vilest affection, and the most depraved; for which cause, it is the proper attribute of the Devil... As it always cometh to pass, that envy worketh subtilly, and in the dark; and to the prejudice of good things."[61]

Sometimes critics have struggled to define the kind of jealousy Othello suffers, or to deny it as a motive (for example, those who claim that in Russia between 1945 and 1957 only one actor portrayed Othello as obsessed by jealousy). In fact jealousy is a wide-ranging emotion and encompasses the spectrum from lust to spiritual disillusionment within which Othello's obsession must fall. And he displays many accepted aspects of jealousy: an eagerness to snatch at proofs, indulging degrading images of the jealousy's object, snatching at ambiguities to ease the mind, dread of vulgar ridicule, and a spirit of vindictiveness.[62]

AsBen Okrihas said:

Or, as theOxfordeditor Professor Michael Neill summarises it: