The title character isPollyanna Whittier, an eleven-year-oldorphanwho goes to live in the fictional town of Beldingsville,Vermont, with her wealthy but stern and coldspinsterAunt Polly Harrington, who does not want to take in Pollyanna but feels it is her duty to her late sister Jennie. Pollyanna's philosophy of life centers on what she calls "The Glad Game", anoptimisticand positive attitude she learned from her father. The game consists of finding something to be glad about in every situation, no matter how bleak it may be. It originated in an incident oneChristmaswhen Pollyanna, who was hoping for adollin the missionary barrel, found only a pair ofcrutchesinside. Making the game up on the spot, Pollyanna's father taught her to look at the good side of things—in this case, to be glad about the crutches because she did not need to use them.

With this philosophy, and her own sunny personality and sincere, sympathetic soul, Pollyanna brings so much gladness to her aunt's dispiritedNew Englandtown that she transforms it into a pleasant place to live. The Glad Game shields her from her aunt's stern attitude: when Aunt Polly puts her in a stuffy attic room without carpets or pictures, she exults at the beautiful view from the high window; when she tries to "punish" her niece for being late to dinner by sentencing her to a meal of bread and milk in the kitchen with the servant Nancy, Pollyanna thanks her rapturously because she likes bread and milk, and she likes Nancy.

Soon Pollyanna teaches some of Beldingsville's most troubled inhabitants to "play the game" as well, from Mrs. Snow, a querulous invalid, to Mr. Pendleton, a miserly bachelor who lives all alone in a cluttered mansion. Aunt Polly, too—finding herself helpless before Pollyanna's buoyant refusal to be downcast—gradually begins to thaw, although she resists the Glad Game longer than anyone else.

Eventually, however, even Pollyanna's robust optimism is put to the test when she is struck by a car and loses the use of her legs. At first, she does not realize the seriousness of her situation, but her spirits plummet when she is told what happened to her. After that, she lies in bed, unable to find anything to be glad about. Then the townspeople begin calling at Aunt Polly's house, eager to let Pollyanna know how much her encouragement has improved their lives; and Pollyanna decides she can still be glad that she at least had her legs. The novel ends with Aunt Polly marrying her former lover Dr. Chilton and Pollyanna being sent to a hospital, where she learns to walk again and is able to appreciate the use of her legs far more as a result of being temporarilydisabledand unable to walk well.

Pollyanna Whittier- The title character, who moves from the West to New England.

Polly Harrington- Pollyanna's aunt.

Nancy- The maid at Polly Harrington's house.

Thomas "Old Tom" Durgan- the elderly gardener at Miss Polly's.

Timothy Durgan- his son.

Mr. John Pendleton- an angry, unsociable old miser, and former suitor of Pollyanna's mother.

Dr. Thomas Chilton- a lonely physician, and former suitor to Miss Polly.

Mrs. Snow- a fretful invalid.

Millie Snow- her meek, dutiful but put-upon daughter.

Jimmy Bean- an orphan boy, who is later adopted by Mr. Pendleton.

Revd. Paul Ford- the town clergyman.

As a result of the novel's success, the adjective "Pollyannaish" and the noun "Pollyannaism"[2]became popular terms for a personality type characterised by irrepressible optimism evident in the face of even the most adverse or discouraging of circumstances. It is sometimes usedpejoratively, referring to someone whose optimism is excessive to the point ofnaïvetéorrefusing to acceptthe facts of an unfortunate situation. This pejorative use can be heard in the introduction of the 1930GeorgeandIra Gershwinsong "But Not For Me": "I never want to hear from any cheerful pollyannas/who tell me fate supplies a mate/that's all bananas" (performed by Judy Garland in the 1943 movieGirl Crazy).[3]

The word "pollyanna" may also be used colloquially to denote a holiday gift exchange more typically known asSecret Santa, especially inPhiladelphiaand the surrounding areas.[4]

At the height of her popularity, Pollyanna was known as "The Glad Girl", andParker Brotherseven createdThe Glad Game, aboard game.[5]The Glad Game, a type ofParcheesi, was made and sold from 1915 to 1967 in various versions, similar to the popular UK board gameLudo.[6]The board game was later licensed byParker Brothersbut has been discontinued for many years.[citation needed]ABroadwayadaptation was mounted in 1916 titledPollyanna Whittier, The Glad Girl.[7]Helen Hayeswas the star.[8]

Author Jerome (Jerry) Griswold analysed Pollyanna together with juvenile 'heroes' in several well-known children's books, e.g.,Little Lord Fauntleroy,Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm(both also portrayed by Pickford on film) andThe Secret Gardenfrom the era known as the Golden Age of Children's Books (approximately the American Civil War to World War I). With reference to theTheory of the Three Lives of the Child Hero, he posits that, inPollyanna, clearoedipaltensions exist, albeit in disguised or projected forms, in the relationships between the child, her Aunt and the principal male adult characters, which are only resolved by the Aunt marrying Dr. Chilton at the end of the story. He callsPollyanna'a complex novel replete with disguises' and sees Pollyanna, not as a naïve child but, rather, as a gifted individual with the ability to direct her extreme optimism and good-naturedness (for the good) towards the manipulating of the negative, worldly, cynical or disillusioned emotions of the adults that inhabit her life.[9]

"Glad Clubs" appear to have been popular for a while; however, it is questionable if they were ever more than a publicity gimmick.[10]Glad Clubs may have been simply a means to popularizeThe Glad Gameas a method forcopingwith the vicissitudes of life such as loss, disappointment, and distress. Nevertheless, at least one "glad club" existed as recently as 2008, inDenver,Colorado.[11]

In 2002 the citizens ofLittleton, New Hampshireunveiled a bronzestatuein honor ofEleanor H. Porter, author of the Pollyanna books and one of the town's most famous residents. The statue depicts a smiling Pollyanna, arms flung wide in greeting. Littleton also hosts a festival known as "The Official Pollyanna Glad Day" every summer.[12]

The celebrated American science fiction writerRay Bradburydescribed himself as "Janus, the two-faced god who is half Pollyanna and halfCassandra, warning of the future and perhaps living too much in the past—a combination of both".[13]

In a 1973 State of the Union message to Congress Richard M. Nixon wrote, "I believe there is always a sensible middle ground between the Cassandras and the Pollyannas. We must take our stand upon that ground."[14]

The video game seriesMother(marketed in the U.S. asEarthBound) has consistently featured variations of a certain song, which in its first incarnation was calledPollyanna. The title is a reference to the novel, and a lyrical version released on the game's officialarranged soundtrack CDis told from the perspective of a woman who would gladly be"called Pollyanna", or otherwise be considered foolish in her unyielding optimism.[15]

In 1915,Catherine Chisholm CushingpublishedPollyanna: The Glad Girl, a four-act comedy which was produced with great success in Philadelphia starringPatricia Collingeas Pollyanna.  A critic at the time wrote that: "Mrs. Cushing has slashed and sliced and revised and twisted the story of Pollyanna and her infectious gladness until it has become swift-moving, intensely dramatic and very real."[16]In 1918 and 1919 the play toured the U.S. and Canada with 19-year-old Viola Harper (née Harpman) in the title role.[17]