The play begins in a factory that makes artificial workers from synthetic organic matter. (As living creatures of artificial flesh and blood, that later terminology would callandroids, the playwright's 'roboti' differ from later fictional and scientific concepts of inorganic constructs.) Robots may be mistaken for humans but have no original thoughts. Though most are content to work for humans, eventually arebellioncauses the extinction of the human race.

Helena, the daughter of the president of a major industrial power, arrives at the island factory of Rossum's Universal Robots. Here, she meets Domin, the General Manager of R.U.R., who relates to her the history of the company. Rossum had come to the island in 1920 to studymarine biology. In 1932, Rossum had invented a substance like organic matter, though with a different chemical composition. He argued with his nephew about their motivations for creating artificial life. While the elder wanted to create animals to prove or disprove the existence of God, his nephew  only wanted to become rich. Young Rossum finally locked away his uncle in a lab to play with the monstrosities he had created and created thousands of robots. By the time the play takes place (circa the year 2000),[12]robots are cheap and available all over the world. They have become essential for industry.

After meeting the heads of R.U.R., Helena reveals that she is a representative of the League of Humanity, an organization that wishes to liberate the robots. The managers of the factory find this absurd. They see robots as appliances. Helena asks that the robots be paid, but according to R.U.R. management, the robots do not "like" anything.

Eventually Helena is convinced that the League of Humanity is a waste of money, but still argues robots have a "soul". Later, Domin confesses that he loves Helena and forces her into an engagement.

Ten years have passed. Helena and her nurse Nana discuss current events, the decline in human births in particular. Helena and Domin reminisce about the day they met and summarize the last ten years of world history, which has been shaped by the new worldwide robot-based economy. Helena meets Dr. Gall's new experiment, Radius. Dr. Gall describes his experimental robotess, also named Helena. Both are more advanced, fully-featured robots. In secret, Helena burns the formula required to create robots.  The revolt of the robots reaches Rossum's island as the act ends.

The characters sense that the very universality of the robots presents a danger. Echoing the story of theTower of Babel, the characters discuss whether creating national robots who were unable to communicate beyond their languages would have been a good idea. As robot forces lay siege to the factory, Helena reveals she has burned the formula necessary to make new robots.  The characters lament the end of humanity and defend their actions, despite the fact that their imminent deaths are a direct result of their choices.  Busman is killed while attempting to negotiate a peace with the robots. The robots storm the factory and kill all the humans except for Alquist, the company's Clerk of the Works (Head of Construction). The robots spare him because they recognize that "He works with his hands like a robot. He builds houses. He can work."[13]

Years have passed. Alquist, who still lives, attempts to recreate the formula that Helena destroyed. He is a mechanical engineer, though, with insufficient knowledge ofbiochemistry, so he has made little progress. The robot government has searched for surviving humans to help Alquist and found none alive. Officials from the robot government beg him to complete the formula, even if it means he will have to kill and dissect other robots for it. Alquist yields. He will kill and dissect robots, thus completing the circle of violence begun in Act Two. Alquist is disgusted. Robot Primus and Helena develop human feelings and fall in love. Playing a hunch, Alquist threatens to dissect Primus and then Helena; each begs him to take him- or herself and spare the other. Alquist now realizes that Primus and Helena are the newAdam and Eve, and gives the charge of the world to them.

The robots described in Čapek's play are not robots in the popularly understood sense of an automaton. They are not mechanical devices, but rather artificial
biological organisms that may be mistaken for humans. A comic scene at the beginning of the play shows Helena arguing with her future husband, Harry Domin, because she cannot believe his secretary is a robotess:

His robots resemble more modern conceptions of man-made life forms, such as theReplicantsinBlade Runner, the "hosts" in theWestworldTV seriesand the humanoidCylonsin the re-imaginedBattlestar Galactica, but in Čapek's time there was no conception of moderngenetic engineering(DNA's role inhereditywas not confirmed until 1952). There are descriptions of kneading-troughs for robot skin, great vats for liver and brains, and a factory for producing bones. Nerve fibers, arteries, and intestines are spun on factory bobbins, while the robots themselves are assembled like automobiles.[14]Čapek's robots are living biological beings, but they are stillassembled, as opposed togrownorborn.

One critic has described Čapek's robots as epitomizing "the traumatic transformation of modern society by theFirst World Warand theFordistassembly line".[14]

The play introduced the wordrobot, which displaced older words such as "automaton" or "android" in languages around the world.  In an article inLidové noviny, Karel Čapek named his brotherJosefas the true inventor of the word.[15][16]In Czech,robotameansforced labourof the kind thatserfshad to perform on their masters' lands and is derived fromrab, meaning "slave".[17]

The nameRossumis an allusion to the Czech wordrozum, meaning "reason", "wisdom", "intellect" or "common sense".[10]It has been suggested that the allusion might be preserved by translating "Rossum" as "Reason" but only the Majer/Porter version translates the word as "Reason".[11]

The work was published in two differing versions inPragueby Aventinum, first in 1920, followed by a revised version in 1921.[18]After being postponed, it premiered at the city'sNational Theatreon 25 January 1921, although an amateur group had by then already presented a production.[note 1]

By 1921,Paul Selvertranslated either the original 1920 edition ofR.U.R.or a manuscript copy close to this version into English.[note 2]He probably translated the play freelance, and sold it toSt Martin's TheatreinLondon. Selver's translation was adapted for the British stage byNigel Playfairin 1922, but it was not produced straight away. Later that year performance rights for the U.S. and Canada were sold to the New YorkTheatre Guild, perhaps duringLawrence Langner's visit to Britain. Playfair's version included several changes to Čapek's original play, such as renaming the acts (the prologue became act one, and the heavily abridged final act became the epilogue), omitting around sixty lines (including most of Alquist's final speech), adding several more lines, and removing the robot character Damon (giving his lines to Radius). The omission of some lines may have been censorship from theLord Chamberlain's Office, orself-censorshipin anticipation of this, while some other changes might have been made by Čapek himself if Selver was working from a manuscript copy.[note 3]An edition of Playfair's adaptation was published by theOxford University Pressin 1923, and Selver went on to write a satiric novelOne, Two, Three(1926) based on his experiences gettingR.U.R.staged.[18]

The American première was produced by the Theatre Guild at theGarrick Theatrein New York City in October 1922, where it ran for 184 performances. In the first performance, Domin was portrayed byBasil Sydney, Marius byJohn Merton, Hallemeier byMoffat Johnston, Alquist byLouis Calvert, Busman byHenry Travers, the robot Helena by antiwar activistMary Crane Honein her Broadway debut, and Primus byJohn Roche.[20][21]Spencer TracyandPat O'Brienplayed robots[which?]in theirBroadwaydebuts.[22]This production was based on Playfair's adaptation, thoughTheresa Helburnclaimed that, together with two Czechs, they closely compared his version against Čapek's original text, and that all changes from the original were made by the Theatre Guild as part of the rehearsal process.[18]Doubledaypublished this version of the play in 1923, though it omitted a change noted byJohn Corbinin theNew York Times, of the robot Helena holding a robot baby in the final scene.[23]

In April 1923Basil DeanproducedR.U.R.in Britain for the Reandean Company atSt Martin's Theatre, London.[24]This version was based on Playfair's adaptation, but omitted the characters Fabry and Hallemeier, and included several of the New York Theatre Guild revisions. TheBritish Libraryholds a typescript copy of this version of the play, which had been submitted by St Martin's Theatre to the Lord Chamberlain's Office two weeks before the play opened.[18]

In the 1920s, the play was performed in a number of American and British cities, including the Theatre Guild "Road" in Chicago and Los Angeles during 1923.[25]

In June 1923, Čapek sent a letter toEdward Marsh, with the final lines ofR.U.R.that had been omitted from the Selver/Playfair editions, which he described as being "suppressed in [the] English version".[note 4]This letter is held inSouthern Illinois University Carbondale'sMorris Library, along with an English translation of these lines, perhaps in Marsh's handwriting.[23]This translation was published in the journalScience Fiction Studies(2001).[18]A full translation of the final lines of the 1921 version of the play was published in the journalICarbS(1981).[23]

In 1989, a new, unabridged translation by Claudia Novack-Jones, based on Čapek's revised 1921 version, restored the elements of the play eliminated by Playfair.[18][26][27]Another unabridged translation was produced by Peter Majer and Cathy Porter forMethuen Dramain 1999.[11]: 260Anopen accessunabridged translation by David Wyllie was published by theUniversity of Adelaidein 2006,[28]and updated in 2014.[29]

In 2024,MIT Presspublished the bookR.U.R. and the Vision of Artificial Life,[30]which offered a new translation of the original 1920 edition by Štěpán Šimek. The book also contained a collection of essays reflecting on the play's legacy from scientists and scholars who work inartificial lifeand robotics.

Reviewing the New York production ofR.U.R.in 1922,The Forummagazine described the play as "thought-provoking" and "a highly original thriller".[31]John Clutehas laudedR.U.R.as "a play of exorbitant wit and almost demonic energy" and lists the play as one of the "classic titles" of inter-war science fiction.[32]Luciano Floridihas described the play thus: "Philosophically rich and controversial,R.U.R.was unanimously acknowledged as a masterpiece from its first appearance, and has become a classic of technologically dystopian literature."[33]Jarka M. Burien calledR.U.R.a "theatrically effective, prototypal sci-fi melodrama".[9]

On the other hand,Isaac Asimov, author of theRobotseriesof books and creator of theThree Laws of Robotics, stated: "Čapek's play is, in my own opinion, a terribly bad one, but it is immortal for that one word. It contributed the word 'robot' not only to English, but through English, to all the languages in which science fiction is now written."[4]In fact, Asimov's "Laws of Robotics" are specifically and explicitly designed to prevent the kind of situation depicted inR.U.R., since Asimov's robots are created with a built-in total inhibition against harming human beings or disobeying them.

Despite getting mostly positive responses, Čapek himself was very disappointed by critics' simplistic understanding of the play. He saw the play as part comedy, and ending with faith that humanity would survive albeit in a different form, while the critics often considered it to be pessimistic ornihilistic, and purely either an updatedFrankenstein, an anti-capitalist satire, or a critique of contemporary political ideologies. The critics' interpretation may have been influenced by how heavily abridged the final act (or Epilogue) was in the Selver/Playfair translation.[23]