The play, set inVerona,Italy, begins with a street brawl betweenMontagueandCapuletservants who, like the masters they serve, are sworn enemies.Prince Escalus of Veronaintervenes and declares that further breach of the peace will be punishable by death. Later,Count Paristalks to Capulet about marrying his daughterJuliet, but Capulet asks Paris to wait another two years and invites him to attend a planned Capuletball. Lady Capulet and Juliet's Nurse try to persuade Juliet to accept Paris's courtship.

Meanwhile,Benvoliotalks with his cousinRomeo, Montague's son, about Romeo's recent depression. Benvolio discovers that it stems from unrequited infatuation for a girl namedRosaline, one of Capulet's nieces. Persuaded by Benvolio andMercutio, Romeo attends the ball at the Capulet house in hopes of meeting Rosaline. However, Romeo instead meets and falls in love with Juliet. Juliet's cousin,Tybalt, is enraged at Romeo for sneaking into the ball but is stopped from killing Romeo by Juliet's father, who does not wish to shed blood in his house. After the ball, in what is now famously known as the "balcony scene," Romeo sneaks into the Capulet orchard and overhears Juliet at her window vowing her love to him in spite of her family's hatred of the Montagues. Romeo makes himself known to her, and they agree to be married. With the help ofFriar Laurence, who hopes to reconcile the two families through their children's union, they are secretly married the next day.

Tybalt, meanwhile, still incensed that Romeo had sneaked into the Capulet ball, challenges him to a duel. Romeo, now considering Tybalt his kinsman, refuses to fight. Mercutio is offended by Tybalt's insolence, as well as Romeo's "vile submission",[1]and accepts the duel on Romeo's behalf. Mercutio is fatally wounded when Romeo attempts to break up the fight, and declares a curse upon both households before he dies. ("A plague on both your houses!") Grief-stricken and racked with guilt, Romeo confronts and slays Tybalt.

Montague argues that Romeo has justly executed Tybalt for the murder of Mercutio. The Prince, now having lost a kinsman in the warring families' feud, exiles Romeo from Verona, under penalty of death if he ever returns. Romeo secretly spends the night in Juliet's chamber, where theyconsummatetheir marriage. Capulet, misinterpreting Juliet's grief, agrees to marry her to Count Paris and threatens to disown her when she refuses to become Paris's "joyful bride".[2]When she then pleads for the marriage to be delayed, her mother rejects her.

Juliet visits Friar Laurence for help, and he offers her a potion that will put her into a deathlike coma orcatalepsyfor "two and forty hours".[3]The Friar promises to send a messenger, Friar John, to inform Romeo of the plan so that he can rejoin her when she awakens.  On the night before the wedding, she takes the drug and, when discovered apparently dead, she is laid in the familycrypt.

Friar John, however, is unable to deliver the message about Juliet to Romeo because the onset of a plague makes travel impossible. Instead, Romeo learns of Juliet's apparent death from his servant, Balthasar. Heartbroken, Romeo buys poison from anapothecaryand goes to the Capulet crypt. He encounters Paris who has come to mourn Juliet privately. Believing Romeo to be a vandal, Paris confronts him and, in the ensuing battle, Romeo kills Paris. Still believing Juliet to be dead, he drinks the poison. Juliet then awakens and, discovering that Romeo is dead, stabs herself with his dagger and joins him in death. The feuding families and the Prince meet at the tomb to find all three dead. Friar Laurence recounts the story of the two "star-cross'd lovers", fulfilling the curse that Mercutio swore. The families are reconciled by their children's deaths and agree to end their violent feud. The play ends with the Prince's elegy for the lovers: "For never was a story of more woe / Than this of Juliet and her Romeo."[4]

Romeo and Julietborrows from a tradition of tragic love stories dating back to antiquity. One of these isPyramus and Thisbe, fromOvid'sMetamorphoses, which contains parallels to Shakespeare's story: the lovers' parents despise each other, and Pyramus falsely believes his lover Thisbe is dead.[5]TheEphesiacaofXenophon of Ephesus, written in the 3rd century, also contains several similarities to the play, including the separation of the lovers, and a potion that induces a deathlike sleep.[6]

One of the earliest references to the namesMontagueandCapuletis fromDante'sDivine Comedy, who mentions the Montecchi (Montagues) and the Cappelletti (Capulets) in canto six ofPurgatorio:[7]

However, the reference is part of a polemic against what Dante saw as moral decay ofFlorence,Lombardy, and theItalian statesin general; through his characters, Dante aimed to chastiseAlbert I of Germanyfor neglecting what Dante felt were his responsibilities towards Italy ("you who are negligent") as "King of the Romans", as well as successivepopesfor their encroachment from purely spiritual affairs, thus leading to a climate of incessant bickering and warfare betweenrival political partiesin Lombardy. History records the name of the familyMontagueas being lent to such a political party inVerona, but that of theCapuletsas from aCremonesefamily, both of whom play out their conflict in Lombardy as a whole rather than within the confines of Verona.[9]Allied to rival political factions, the parties are grieving ("One lot already grieving") because their endless warfare has led to the destruction of both parties,[9]rather than a grief from the loss of their ill-fated offspring as the play sets forth, which appears to be a solely poetic creation within this context.

The earliest known version of theRomeo and Juliettale akin to Shakespeare's play is the story of Mariotto and Ganozza byMasuccio Salernitano, in the 33rd novel of hisIl Novellinopublished in 1476.[10]Salernitano sets the story inSienaand insists its events took place in his own lifetime. His version of the story includes the secret marriage, the colluding friar, the fray where a prominent citizen is killed, Mariotto's exile, Ganozza's forced marriage, the potion plot, and the crucial message that goes astray. In this version, Mariotto is caught and beheaded and Ganozza dies of grief.[11][12]

Luigi da Porto(1485–1529) adapted the story asGiulietta e Romeo[13]and included it in hisHistoria novellamente ritrovata di due nobili amanti(A Newly-Discovered History of two Noble Lovers), written in 1524 and published posthumously in 1531 in Venice.[14][15]Da Porto drew onPyramus and Thisbe,Boccaccio'sDecameron, and Salernitano'sMariotto e Ganozza, but it is likely that his story is also autobiographical:  He was a soldier present at a ball on 26 February 1511, at a residence of the pro-VeniceSavorgnan clan inUdine, following a peace ceremony attended by the opposing pro-ImperialStrumieri clan.  There, Da Porto fell in love with Lucina, a Savorgnan daughter, but the family feud frustrated their courtship. The next morning,the Savorgnans led an attack on the city, and many members of the Strumieri were murdered. Years later, still half-paralyzed from a battle-wound, Luigi wroteGiulietta e RomeoinMontorso Vicentino(from which he could see the "castles" of Verona), dedicating thenovellato thebellisima e leggiadra(the beautiful and graceful) Lucina Savorgnan.[13][16]Da Porto presented his tale as historically factual and claimed it took place at least a century earlier than Salernitano had it, in the days Verona was ruled by Bartolomeo della Scala[17](anglicized asPrince Escalus).

Da Porto presented the narrative in close to its modern form, including the names of the lovers, the rival families of Montecchi and Capuleti (Cappelletti) and the location in Verona.[10]He named thefriar Laurence(frate Lorenzo) and introduced the charactersMercutio(Marcuccio Guertio),Tybalt(Tebaldo Cappelletti),Count Paris(conte (Paride) diLodrone), the faithful servant, andGiulietta's nurse. Da Porto originated the remaining basic elements of the story: the feuding families, Romeo—left by his mistress—meeting Giulietta at a dance at her house, the love scenes (including the balcony scene), the periods of despair, Romeo killing Giulietta's cousin (Tebaldo), and the families' reconciliation after the lovers' suicides.[18]In da Porto's version, Romeo takes poison and Giulietta keeps her breath until she dies.[19]

In 1554,Matteo Bandellopublished the second volume of hisNovelle, which included his version ofGiulietta e Romeo,[15]probably written between 1531 and 1545.  Bandello lengthened and weighed down the plot while leaving the storyline basically unchanged (though he did introduceBenvolio).[18]Bandello's story was translated into French byPierre Boaistuauin 1559 in the first volume of hisHistoires Tragiques. Boaistuau adds much moralising and sentiment, and the characters indulge in rhetorical outbursts.[20]

In his 1562narrative poemThe Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet, Arthur Brooke translated Boaistuau faithfully but adjusted it to reflect parts of Chaucer'sTroilus and Criseyde.[21]There was a trend among writers and playwrights to publish works based on Italiannovelle—Italian tales were very popular among theatre-goers—and Shakespeare may well have been familiar withWilliam Painter's 1567 collection of Italian tales titledPalace of Pleasure.[22]This collection included a version in prose of theRomeo and Julietstory named"The goodly History of the true and constant love of Romeo and Juliett". Shakespeare took advantage of this popularity:The Merchant of Venice,Much Ado About Nothing,All's Well That Ends Well,Measure for Measure, andRomeo and Julietare all from Italiannovelle.Romeo and Julietis a dramatization of Brooke's translation, and Shakespeare follows the poem closely but adds detail to several major and minor characters (the Nurse and Mercutio in particular).[23][24][25]

Christopher Marlowe'sHero and LeanderandDido, Queen of Carthage, both similar stories written in Shakespeare's day, are thought to be less of a direct influence, although they may have helped create an atmosphere in which tragic love stories could thrive.[21]

It is unknown when exactly Shakespeare wroteRomeo and Juliet. Juliet's Nurse refers to an earthquake she says occurred 11 years ago.[26]This may refer to theDover Straits earthquake of 1580, which would date that particular line to 1591. Other earthquakes—both in England and in Verona—have been proposed in support of the different dates.[27]But the play's stylistic similarities withA Midsummer Night's Dreamand other plays conventionally dated around 1594–95, place its composition sometime between 1591 and 1595.[28][b]One conjecture is that Shakespeare may have begun a draft in 1591, which he completed in 1595.[29]

Shakespeare'sRomeo and Julietwas published in twoquartoeditions prior to the publication of theFirst Folioof 1623. These are referred to as Q1 and Q2. The first printed edition, Q1, appeared in early 1597, printed by John Danter. Because its text contains numerous differences from the later editions, it is labelled a so-called 'bad quarto'; the 20th-century editor T. J. B. Spencer described it as "a detestable text, probably a reconstruction of the play from the imperfect memories of one or two of the actors", suggesting that it had been pirated for publication.[30]An alternative explanation for Q1's shortcomings is that the play (like many others of the time) may have been heavily edited before performance by the playing company.[31]However, "the theory, formulated by [Alfred] Pollard," that the 'bad quarto' was reconstructed from memory by some of the actors is now under attack. Alternative theories are that some or all of 'the bad quartos' are early versions by Shakespeare or abbreviations made either for Shakespeare's company or for other companies."[32]In any event, its appearance in early 1597 makes 1596 the latest possible date for the play's composition.[27]

The superior Q2 called the playThe Most Excellent and Lamentable Tragedie of Romeo and Juliet. It was printed in 1599 byThomas Creedeand published byCuthbert Burby. Q2 is about 800 lines longer than Q1.[31]Its title page describes it as "Newly corrected, augmented and amended". Scholars believe that Q2 was based on Shakespeare's pre-performance draft (called hisfoul papers) since there are textual oddities such as variable tags for characters and "false starts" for speeches that were presumably struck through by the author but erroneously preserved by the typesetter. It is a much more complete and reliable text and was reprinted in 1609 (Q3), 1622 (Q4) and 1637 (Q5).[30]In effect, all later Quartos and Folios ofRomeo and Julietare based on Q2, as are all modern editions since editors believe that any deviations from Q2 in the later editions (whether good or bad) are likely to have arisen from editors or compositors, not from Shakespeare.[31]

The First Folio text of 1623 was based primarily on Q3, with clarifications and corrections possibly coming from a theatrical prompt book or Q1.[30][33]Other Folio editions of the play were printed in 1632 (F2), 1664 (F3), and 1685 (F4).[34]Modern versions—that take into account several of the Folios and Quartos—first appeared withNicholas Rowe's 1709 edition, followed byAlexander Pope's 1723 version. Pope began a tradition of editing the play to add information such as stage directions missing in Q2 by locating them in Q1. This tradition continued late into theRomanticperiod. Fully annotated editions first appeared in theVictorian periodand continue to be produced today, printing the text of the play with footnotes describing the sources and culture behind the play.[35]

Scholars have found it extremely difficult to assign one specific, overarchingthemeto the play. Proposals for a main theme include a discovery by the characters that human beings are neither wholly good nor wholly evil, but instead are more or less alike,[36]awaking out of a dream and into reality, the danger of hasty action, or the power of tragic fate. None of these have widespread support. However, even if an overall theme cannot be found it is clear that the play is full of several small thematic elements that intertwine in complex ways. Several of those most often debated by scholars are discussed below.[37]

Romeo and Julietis sometimes considered to have no unifying theme, save that of young love.[36]Romeo and Juliet have become emblematic of young lovers and doomed love. Since it is such an obvious subject of the play, several scholars have explored the language and historical context behind the romance of the play.[39]

On their first meeting, Romeo and Juliet use a form of communication recommended by many etiquette authors in Shakespeare's day: metaphor. By using metaphors of saints and sins, Romeo was able to test Juliet's feelings for him in a non-threatening way. This method was recommended byBaldassare Castiglione(whose works had been translated into English by this time). He pointed out that if a man used a metaphor as an invitation, the woman could pretend she did not understand him, and he could retreat without losing honour. Juliet, however, participates in the metaphor and expands on it. The religious metaphors of "shrine", "pilgrim", and "saint" were fashionable in the poetry of the time and more likely to be understood as romantic rather than blasphemous, as the concept of sainthood was associated with the Catholicism of an earlier age.[40]Later in the play, Shakespeare removes the more daring allusions to Christ's resurrection in the tomb he found in his source work: Brooke'sRomeus and Juliet.[41]

In the later balcony scene, Shakespeare has Romeo overhear Juliet's soliloquy, but in Brooke's version of the story, her declaration is done alone. By bringing Romeo into the scene to eavesdrop, Shakespeare breaks from the normal sequence of courtship. Usually, a woman was required to be modest and shy to make sure that her suitor was sincere, but breaking this rule serves to speed along the plot. The lovers are able to skip courting and move on to plain talk about their relationship—agreeing to be married after knowing each other for only one night.[39]In the final suicide scene, there is a contradiction in the message—in the Catholic religion, suicides were often thought to be condemned to Hell, whereas people who die to be with their loves under the "Religion of Love" are joined with their loves in Paradise. Romeo and Juliet's love seems to be expressing the "Religion of Love" view rather than the Catholic view. Another point is that, although their love is passionate, it is only consummated in marriage, which keeps them from losing the audience's sympathy.[42]

The play arguably equates love and sex with death. Throughout the story, both Romeo and Juliet, along with the other characters, fantasise aboutit as a dark being, often equating it with a lover. Capulet, for example, when he first discovers Juliet's (faked) death, describes it as havingdefloweredhis daughter.[43]Juliet later erotically compares Romeo and death. Right before her suicide, she grabs Romeo's dagger, saying "O happy dagger! This is thy sheath. There rust, and let me die."[44][45]