Tess Durbeyfield, a country girl of 16, is the eldest child of John Durbeyfield, a haggler, and his wife Joan. When the localparsontells John that "Durbeyfield" is a corruption of "D'Urberville" and that he is descended from an ancientNormanfamily, John celebrates by getting drunk. Tess drives to market in her father's place, but falls asleep at the reins; the wagon crashes and the family's only horse is killed. Feeling guilty, she agrees to visit Mrs d'Urberville, a rich widow, to "claim kin", unaware that the widow's late husband Simon Stoke had adopted the surname to distance himself from his tradesman's roots.

Alec d'Urberville, the son, is attracted to Tess and finds her a job as his mother's poultry keeper. Tess resists Alec's manipulative attentions. One night, on the pretence of rescuing her from a fight, Alec takes her on his horse to a remote spot, and it is implied that he rapes her.[2]

The following summer, Tess gives birth to a sickly boy. Unable to find a parson prepared to christen a child born out of wedlock, Tess attempts to do it herself, naming her dying child Sorrow.

Some years later, Tess finds employment as amilkmaidat Talbothays Dairy, where her past is unknown. She falls in love with Angel Clare, an apprenticegentleman farmerwho is studying dairy management.

Angel's father, James Clare, a clergyman, is surprised that his son wishes to marry a milkmaid but makes no objection, understanding Tess to be a pure and devout country maiden.

Feeling she has no choice but to conceal her past, Tess is reluctant to accept Angel's marriage proposal, but eventually agrees. She later tries several times to tell Angel of her history, but he says that they can share confidences after the wedding.

The couple spend their wedding night at an old d'Urberville mansion. When Angel confesses that he once had a brief affair with an older woman, Tess tells him about Alec, sure now he will understand and forgive.

Angel is appalled. Tess is not the pure maiden he took her for, and although he concedes she was "more sinned against" than sinning, he feels that her "want of firmness" amounts to a character flaw. The couple separate after a few days. Tess returns home while Angel travels to Brazil to try farming there.

Tess's family soon exhaust the funds Angel has given her, and she is forced to take field work at thestarve-acrefarm of Flintcomb-Ash.

Alec d'Urberville continues to pursue Tess although she is already married. When Tess learns from her younger sister 'Liza-Lu that her parents are ill, she rushes home. Her mother recovers but her father dies, and the destitute family is evicted from their home. Alec tells Tess that her husband will never return, and he offers to house the Durbeyfields on his estate. She refuses.

Angel's farming venture fails, he repents of his treatment of Tess, and he decides to return to England.

After a long search, Angel finds Tess elegantly dressed and living in aboarding housein the fashionable seaside resort ofSandbourne, under the name of "Mrs d'Urberville". In anguish, Tess tells him he has arrived too late. Angel reluctantly leaves.

Tess and Alec argue, and Tess leaves the house. Sitting in her parlour beneath the d'Urbervilles' rented rooms, the landlady notices a spreading red spot – a bloodstain – on the ceiling. Tess has stabbed Alec to death in his bed.

Tess chases after Angel and tells him of the deed. The couple find an empty house and stay there for five days in blissful, loving seclusion before being forced to move to evade capture. In the night, they stumble uponStonehenge. Tess asks Angel to marry and look after 'Liza-Lu when she is gone. She sleeps on an ancient stone altar. At dawn, while Tess sleeps, Angel sees they are surrounded. Tess's final words on waking are "I am ready."

Angel and 'Liza-Lu look down at 8 a.m. from a nearby hill over the town ofWintoncesteras a black flag that signals Tess's execution is raised over the prison. Angel and 'Liza-Lu go on their way hand in hand.

Hardy's writing often explores what he called the "ache of modernism", a theme notable inTess, which as one critic noted, Hardy draws on imagery associated with hell to describe modern farm machinery and suggests the effete nature of city life as milk sent there must be watered down before townspeople can stomach it.[3]

On the other hand, the Marxist criticRaymond WilliamsinThe English Novel from Dickens to Lawrencequestions the identification of Tess with a peasantry destroyed byindustrialization. Williams sees Tess not as a peasant, but as an educated member of the rural working class, who suffers a tragedy through being thwarted in her hopes to rise socially and desire for a good life (which includes love and sex), not by industrialism, but by the landed bourgeoisie (Alec), liberal idealism (Angel) and Christian moralism in her family's village (see Chapter LI). Earlier commentators were not always appreciative.Henry JamesandRobert Louis Stevensonin Bournemouth "loved to talk of books and bookmen. Stevenson, unlike James, was an admirer of Thomas Hardy, but wrote to James expressing his violent reaction toTess of the D'Urbervilles;James wrote back agreeing the book was 'vile' (not a word used by Stevenson).

Because of the numerouspaganand neo-Biblicalreferences made about her, Tess has been seen variously as an Earth goddess or a sacrificial victim.[4]

Tess has been seen as a personification of nature, an idea supported by her ties with animals throughout the novel. Tess's misfortunes begin when she falls asleep while driving Prince to market and causes the horse's death; at Trantridge she becomes a poultry-keeper; she and Angel fall in love amid cows in the fertile Froom valley; on the road to Flintcomb-Ash, she kills some wounded pheasants to end their suffering.[5]

However, Tess emerges as a powerful character not through this symbolism but because "Hardy's feelings for her were strong, perhaps stronger than for any of his other invented personages."[6]

When Hardy was 16, he saw the hanging ofElizabeth Martha Brown, who had murdered a violent husband. This fascinating, yet repellent experience contributed to the writing ofTess.[7][8]

The moral commentary running through the novel insists thatTessis not at fault, instead imposing mythological, biblical and folk imagery on a story of a young girl seduced and abandoned to create a "challenging contemporaneity".[9]It was controversial and polarizing, setting these elements in a context of 19th-century English society, including disputes in the Church, theNational Schoolmovement, the overall class structure of English society, and changing circumstances of rural labour. During the era offirst-wave feminism, civil divorce was introduced and campaigns were waged against child prostitution, moving gender and sexuality issues to the forefront of public discussion. Hardy's work was criticized as vulgar, but by the late 19th century other experimental fiction works were released such asFlorence Dixie's depiction offeminist utopia,The Story of an African FarmbyOlive Schreiner, andSarah Grand's workThe Heavenly Twins. These raised awareness ofsyphilisand advocated sensitivity rather than condemnation for young women infected with it.[10]

Hardy's description leaves it unclear whether Alec d’Urberville rapes Tess or whether he seduces her, and the issue has been the subject of debate.[2][11]

Mary Jacobus, a commentator on Hardy's works, speculates that the rape/seduction ambiguity may have been forced on the author to meet publisher requirements and the "Grundyist" readership of his time.[12]

The novel was adapted for the stage in 1897. The production by Lorimer Stoddard proved a Broadway triumph for actressMinnie Maddern Fiskewhen it opened on 2 March 1897.[13]Acopyright performancewas given atSt James's Theatrein London on the same date.[14]It was revived in America in 1902 and then made into a motion picture byAdolph Zukorin 1913, starring Mrs. Fiske; no copies remain.

In the UK, an adaptation,Tess, by H. Mountford, opened at theGrand TheatreinBlackpoolon 5 January 1900.[14]

Tess, a different stage adaptation by H. A. Kennedy, premièred at theCoronet Theatrein London'sNotting HillGate on 19 February 1900.[14]Mrs Lewis Waller (Florence West) played the title role, with William Kettridge as Angel Clare and Whitworth Jones as Alec Tantridge.[15]The play transferred to theComedy Theatrefor 17 performances from 14 April 1900 with a slightly different cast, includingFred Terryas Alec andOswald Yorkeas Angel.[16]Hardy wrote to the Times stating that he had played no part in the dramatisation, did not authorise its production and did not know how the play unfolded, other than by what he had read in the papers.[17]

In 1924, Hardy wrote a British theatrical adaptation and choseGertrude Bugler, aDorchestergirl from the original Hardy Players to play Tess.[18]The Hardy Players (re-formed in 2005) was an amateur group from Dorchester that re-enacted Hardy's novels. Bugler was acclaimed,[19]but prevented from taking the London stage part by the jealousy of Hardy's wifeFlorence;[citation needed]Hardy had said that young Gertrude was the true incarnation of the Tess he had imagined. Years before writing the novel, Hardy had been inspired by the beauty of her mother Augusta Way, then an 18-year-old milkmaid, when he visited Augusta's father's farm inBockhampton. When Hardy saw Bugler (he rehearsed The Hardy Players at the hotel run by her parents), he immediately recognised her as a young image of the now older Augusta.[18]

The novel was successfully adapted for the stage several more times:

1906: An Italian operatic version written byFrederic d'Erlangerwas first performed in Naples, but the run was cut short by an eruption ofMount Vesuvius. When the opera came to London three years later, Hardy, then 69, attended the premiere.

The story has also been filmed at least eight times, including three for general release through cinemas and four television productions.