Twelve years before the action of the play,Prospero, formerly Duke ofMilanand a gifted sorcerer, had been usurped by his treacherous brother Antonio with the aid of Alonso, King ofNaples. Escaping by boat with his infant daughterMiranda, Prospero flees to a remote island where he has been living ever since.  There he used his magic to force the island's only inhabitant,Caliban, to protect him and Miranda. He also frees the spiritArieland binds them into servitude.

When a ship carrying his brother Antonio passes nearby, Prospero conjures up a storm with help from Ariel and the ship is destroyed. Antonio is shipwrecked, along with Alonso, Ferdinand (Alonso's son and heir to the throne), Sebastian (Alonso's brother), Gonzalo (Prospero's trustworthy minister), Adrian, and other court members.

Prospero enacts a sophisticated plan to take revenge on his usurpers and regain his dukedom. Using magic, he separates the shipwreck survivors into groups on the island:

Prospero intends that Miranda, now aged 15, will marry Ferdinand, and he instructs Ariel to bring some other spirits and produce a masque.

The masque will feature classical goddesses,Juno,Ceres, andIris, and will bless and celebrate the betrothal. The masque will also instruct the young couple on marriage, and on the value of chastity until then.

The masque is suddenly interrupted when Prospero realises he had forgotten the plot against his life. Once Ferdinand and Miranda are gone, Prospero orders Ariel to deal with the nobles' plot. Caliban, Trinculo, and Stephano are then chased off into the swamps by goblins in the shape of hounds.

Prospero vows that once he achieves his goals, he will set Ariel free, and abandon his magic, saying:

Ariel brings on Alonso, Antonio, and Sebastian. Prospero forgives all three. Prospero's former title, Duke of Milan, is restored. Ariel fetches the sailors from the ship, and then Caliban, Trinculo, and Stephano. Caliban, seemingly filled with regret, promises to be good. Stephano and Trinculo are ridiculed and sent away in shame by Prospero. Before the reunited group (all the noble characters with the addition of Miranda and Prospero) leave the island, Ariel is instructed to provide good weather to guide the king's ship back to the royal fleet and then to Naples, where Ferdinand and Miranda will be married. After this, Ariel is set free.

In an epilogue, Prospero requests that the audience set him free — with their applause.

It is not known for certain exactly whenThe Tempestwas written, but evidence supports the idea that it was probably composed sometime between late 1610 to mid-1611.[2][3]Evidence supports composition perhaps occurring before, after, or at the same time asThe Winter's Tale.[2]It is considered one of the last plays that Shakespeare wrote alone. But it was not, as is sometimes claimed, Shakespeare's last play, since it is post-dated by his collaborations withJohn Fletcher:Henry VIII,CardenioandThe Two Noble Kinsmen.[4]Edward BlountenteredThe Tempestinto theStationers' Registeron 8 November 1623. It was one of 16 Shakespeare plays that Blount registered on that date.[5]

There is no obvious singlesource textfor the plot ofThe Tempest: it appears to have been created by Shakespeare with several sources contributing.[6]

The Sea Venture:William Strachey'sA True Reportory of the Wracke and Redemption of Sir Thomas Gates, Knight, an eyewitness report of the real-life shipwreck of theSea Venturein 1609 on the island ofBermudawhile sailing towardVirginia, may be considered a primary source for the opening scene, as well as a few other references in the play to conspiracies and retributions.[7]Although not published until 1625, Strachey's report was first recounted in his "Letter to an Excellent Lady", a private letter describing the incident and the earliest account of all. It was dated 15 July 1610, and it is thought that Shakespeare - who had personal connections with a number of members of the Virginia Company - may have seen the original sometime during that year.[8][9]At around the time Shakespeare could have read Strachey's letter, anotherSea Venturesurvivor,Silvester Jourdain, published his account,A Discovery of The Barmudas, otherwise Called the Ile of Divels.[10]Also there is the Council of Virginia's 1610 pamphletTrue Declaration of the state of the Colonie in Virginia, with a confutation of such scandalous reports as have tended to the disgrace of so worthy an enterprise.[11]Regarding the influence of Strachey on the play,Kenneth Muirsays that although "there is little doubt that Shakespeare had read ... William Strachey'sTrue Reportory" and other accounts, "the extent of the verbal echoes of [the Bermuda] pamphlets has, I think, been exaggerated. There is hardly a shipwreck in history or fiction which does not mention splitting, in which the ship is not lightened of its cargo, in which the passengers do not give themselves up for lost, in which north winds are not sharp, and in which no one gets to shore by clinging to wreckage."[12]

Montagne'sOf The Canibales:Gonzalo's description of his ideal society[13]thematically and verbally echoesMontaigne'sessayOf the Canibales, translated into English in a version published byJohn Florioin 1603. Montaigne praises the society of theCaribbeannatives: "It is a nation ... that hath no kinde of traffike, no knowledge of Letters, no intelligence of numbers, no name of magistrate, nor of politike superioritie; no use of service, of riches, or of poverty; no contracts, no successions, no dividences, no occupation but idle; no respect of kinred, but common, no apparrell but natural, no manuring of lands, no use of wine, corne, or mettle. The very words that import lying, falsehood, treason, dissimulation, covetousnes, envie, detraction, and pardon, were never heard of amongst them."[14]

Ovid'sMetamorphoses:A source for Prospero's speech in act five, in which he bids farewell to magic[15]is an invocation by the sorceressMedeafound in Ovid's poemMetamorphoses. Medea calls out:

Shakespeare's Prospero begins his invocation:

Other Sources: Other shipwreck narratives probably drawn on by Shakespeare include those ofAntonio Pigafettacontained in Richard Eden's travel anthologies of 1555 and 1557.[19]And some of the characters' names may derive from a 1594History of Italy.[20]

The Tempestmay take its overall structure from traditional Italiancommedia dell'arte, which sometimes featured amagusand his daughter, their supernatural attendants, and a number of rustics. Thecommediaoften featured aclownknown asArlecchino(or his predecessor,Zanni) and his partnerBrighella, who bear a striking resemblance to Stephano and Trinculo; a lecherous Neapolitan hunchback who corresponds to Caliban; and the clever and beautiful Isabella, whose wealthy and manipulative father,Pantalone, constantly seeks a suitor for her, thus mirroring the relationship between Miranda and Prospero.[21]Other dramatic influences on Prospero's character includeGreene'sFriar Bacon,Marlowe'sDr. Faustusand Shakespeare's ownOwen Glendower.[22]Bremo inMucedorusmay have influenced Caliban.[23]

Scholars have debated the influence ofVirgil'sAeneid, which Robert Wiltenburg described as "the main source of the play ... not the source of the plot ... but the work to which Shakespeare is responding".[24]

Recently, scholars have also identified the influence on the Tempest ofMarston'sThe Malcontent,[25]Beaumont and Fletcher'sPhilaster[25]and the anonymous romancePrimaleon, Prince of Greece.[26]

The Tempestfirst appeared in print in 1623 in the collection of 36 of Shakespeare's plays entitled,Mr. William Shakespeare's Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies; Published according to the True and Original Copies, which is known as theFirst Folio. The plays, includingThe Tempest, were gathered and edited byJohn HemingesandHenry Condell.[27]

The Folio text was based on a handwritten manuscript ofThe Tempestprepared byRalph Crane, ascriveneremployed by the King's Men. Crane probably copied from Shakespeare's rough draft, and based his style on Ben Jonson's Folio of 1616. Crane is thought to have neatened texts, edited the divisions of acts and scenes, and sometimes added his own improvements. He was fond of joining words with hyphens, and using elisions with apostrophes, for example by changing "with the king" to read: "wi'th' King".[28]The elaborate stage directions inThe Tempestmay have been due to Crane; they provide evidence regarding how the play was staged by the King's Men.[29]

The entire First Folio project was delivered to the blind printer,William Jaggard, and printing began in 1622.The Tempestis the first play in the publication. It was proofread and printed with special care; it is the most well-printed and the cleanest text of the thirty-six plays. To do the work of setting the type in the printing press, three compositors were used forThe Tempest. In the 1960s, a landmark bibliographic study of the First Folio was accomplished byCharlton Hinman. Based on distinctive quirks in the printed words on the page, the study was able to individuate the compositors, and reveal that three compositors worked onThe Tempest, who are known as Compositor B, C, and F. Compositor B worked onThe Tempest's first page as well as six other pages. He was an experienced journeyman in Jaggard's printshop, who occasionally could be careless. In his role, he may have had a responsibility for the entire First Folio. The other two, Compositors C and F, worked full-time and were experienced printers.[27]

At the time, spelling and punctuation was not standardized and will vary from page to page, because each compositor had their individual preferences and styles. There is evidence that the press run was stopped at least four times, which allowed proofreading and corrections. However, a page with an error would not be discarded, so pages late in any given press run would be the most accurate, and each of the final printed folios may vary in this regard. This is the common practice at the time. There is also an instance of a letter (a metalsortor a type) being damaged (possibly) during the course of a run and changing the meaning of a word: After the masque Ferdinand says,

The word "wise" at the end of line 123 was printed with the traditional long "s" that resembles an "f". But in 1978 it was suggested that during the press run, a small piece of the crossbar on the type had broken off, and the word should be "wife". Modern editors have not come to an agreement—Oxford says "wife", Arden says "wise".[30][31][32]

The Tempestis explicitly concerned with its own nature as a play, frequently drawing links between Prospero's art and theatrical illusion. The shipwreck was a spectacle that Ariel performed.[34]Prospero may even refer to theGlobe Theatrewhen he describes the whole world as an illusion: "the great globe ... shall dissolve ... like this insubstantial pageant".[35]Ariel frequently disguises himself as figures fromClassical mythology, for example anymph, aharpy, andCeres, acting as the latter in amasquethat Prospero creates.[36]

The masque inThe Tempestis not itself amasque; rather, it is a dramatisation of a masque, while serving the narrative of the drama that contains it.[37]It is an example of Propsero's magic art: a performance in which Ariel and his fellows play the roles.[38][39]In it, the goddessesIris,CeresandJunocelebrate the betrothal of Miranda and Ferdinand.[40][41]

The language of the masque is stylized and artificial - to the point that some twentieth century critics dispraised it or considered it the work of another writer.[42]

The Tempestas a whole contains elements which are derived from the masque as its leading practitioner,Ben Jonson, was developing it: specifically a masque is a movement from conflict to harmony, asThe Tempestis, and masques centre onantitheses, as seen - for example - in the depiction of Ariel and Caliban as exquisite -v- monstrous, grateful -v- ungrateful orair -v- earth.[43]

The tone of Prospero's speech towards his three enemies Antonio, Alonso and Sebastian throughout the play is of rage and vengeance. However in the final act, Prospero tells Ariel "They being penitent, the sole drift of my purpose doth extend not a frown further."[44]But as Stephen Orgel notes in his introduction to the Oxford edition of the play, there is a condition in this speech which is not fulfilled: that Antonio is given no speech of remorse or contrition at the end of the play.[45]

Prospero freely forgives Alonso. But in his final speeches towards Antonio, Prospero's attitude vascillates: "You, brother mine, that entertained ambition ... I do forgive thee"[46]but then immediately reverses himself: "Unnatural though thou art!"[47]and reconsiders upon remembering the conspiracy to kill Alonso: "At this time I will tell no tales"[48]then almost reverses himself with: "Most wicked sir, whom to call brother would even infect my mouth"[49]and only then confirms his forgiveness, while giving Antonio no opportunity to repent: "I do forgive thy rankest fault - all of them; and require my dukedom of thee, which perforce I know thou must restore."[50][51]

The spareness of Shakespeare's writing in the last act give scope to the actor playing Prospero to decide whether it was always the intention to forgive his enemies or whether he is influenced by Ariel's advice to be "tender",[52]and similarly whether the change is gradual, is sudden, or is forced upon him by shame or expediency.[53]

An important aspect of Prospero's project is to secure his dynasty by marrying his daughter, Miranda, to the heir of Naples, Ferdinand, for whom she is only a suitable bride if she is a virgin.[54][55]Chastity had also become embodied as a royal virtue through the reign ofElizabeth, the "Virgin Queen".[54]

Miranda is seen as a sexual object by three characters:

The latter leads to chastity becoming the primary theme of the masque in Act IV, prefixed by Prospero's warning to Ferdinand: "But if thou dost break her virgin-knot before all sanctimonious ceremonies may with full and holy rite be ministered, no sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall to make this contract grow."[58]Venus and Cupid (who, in the mythology, initiated the abduction ofProserpina) are banished from the masque, and the songs of Ceres and Juno[59]celebrate chaste love.[60]

Prospero has been described as practicing "theurgy", white magic, known in Shakespeare's time fromneo-Platonicwriters, and contrasted with "goety", black magic.[61]ContemporaryDr John Deeregarded himself as practicing this white magic, but all magic was condemned by the church and the state:King Jamesin his bookDaemonologiehaving declared it punishable by death.[62]Early modern plays about magic had portrayed it negatively: most famously inMarlowe'sDoctor Faustus, but also, quite recently at the timeThe Tempestwas written, inJonson's satireThe Alchemist, played by Shakespeare's own company,The King's Men, in which the central magician character, Subtle, is merely a con man.[63]

In another more positive interpretation, Prospero's magic is an extension of science.Francis Bacon(who was at the time King James's Attorney-General) had written in hisMagnalia Naturaeof the possibility of the new philosophy giving humans powers over storms, seasons, germination and harvests.[64]

Prospero often invokes the language ofalchemybut his project is to transform not metals, but people: especially Caliban and Prospero's former enemies Antonio, Sebastian and Alsonso.[65]And he has the signifiers that Elizabethan audiences would have associated with magical power: his books, his staff and his robe.[66]

In the end Prospero must abandon his magic. He must free himself from the temptation to use magic for revenge, and from the distraction from his ducal duties which had caused his fall from power twelve years earlier.[67][68]

Related to Prospero's magic is the contrast between himself and the unseen characterSycorax, Caliban's mother, an Algerian witch who inhabited the island and died prior to Prospero and Miranda's arrival. Prospero himself makes much of the distinction between his own magical skill and that of Sycorax - both in moral terms (his white magic against her black magic) and in terms of his greater powers - exemplified by the fact that Sycorax "could not again undo"[69]Ariel's imprisonment in a cloven pine and "It was mine [Prospero's] art ... that made gape the pine and let thee out."[70][67]

Scholar Stephen Orgel concludes that "attitudes towards magic in the play ... range from the most positive to the most negative"[68]but that twentieth century criticism emphasised the virtuous aspects of Propspero's magic: citingFrances YatesandFrank Kermodeamong those who praise Propsero's theurgy over the goety of Sycorax.[68]But Orgel goes on to reject this view as an oversimplification: pointing out that there is no evidence that the spirits controlled by Sycorax are any lower than (or, indeed, any other than) those controlled by Prospero, and also that Ariel is the unwilling servant of both.[71]

The moral superiority of Prospero over Sycorax is also undermined in Prospero's speech renouncing his magic[72]which many in Shakespeare's audiences would have known (see "Sources" above) was a quotation from the witch Medea in Ovid'sMetamorphoses.[67][73]

Thomas Campbellin 1838 was the first to consider that Prospero was meant to partially represent Shakespeare, but then abandoned that idea when he came to believe thatThe Tempestwas an early play.[74]Even so, the idea has persisted in the critical canon that Prospero may be partly autobiographical.[74][75]

As it was probably Shakespeare's last solo play,The Tempesthas often been seen as a valedictory for his career, especially in the passages beginning "Our revels now are ended..."[76]and "Ye elves of hills...".[77][78]Of the latter, Shakespeare's biographerSamuel Schoenbaumhas suggested that it is more pertinent to Shakespeare than to Prospero, since there is nothing to suggested that at Prospero's command "Graves ... have wak'd their sleepers, ope'd, and let 'em forth"[79]- something Shakespeare has done, metaphorically, for many an historical character through his works.[80]

And in the epilogue of the play, Prospero enters into a parabasis (a direct address to the audience) in which he tells the audience "Let your indulgence set me free".[81]Because Prospero is often identified with Shakespeare himself in this final speech, both appear (in the words of Germaine Greer) to be "[not] so much bidding farewell to the stage as begging to be released from it".[82][83][84]

Comedy: The Tempest is listed first among the "Comedies" in the 1623First Folioof Shakespeare's works.[85]The plot contains elements deriving from the Italian tradition ofcommedia dell'arte.[86]In Shakespeare's time, whether a work was classified as comedy was chiefly defined by the resolution of its plot: typically one ending in marriage.[87]

Tragicomedy: Although the plot contains similarities to Shakespeare's early comedies, its darker tone has led some twentieth-century critics including Joan Hartwig to label it atragicomedyin the same tradition as contemporary mixed-mode plays such as the collaborations betweenBeaumont and Fletcher.[88]E. M. W. Tillyardargued that the classic principles of tragedy were divided between two of Shakespeare's late plays: destruction being explored more fully inThe Winter's Tale, and regeneration more fully inThe Tempest.[89]

Romance: Four of Shakespeare's late plays -Pericles,Cymbeline,The Winter's TaleandThe Tempest- have become grouped together as hisromances.[90][91]This places them in a tradition derived from third-century Greek narratives, and practiced by Elizabethan writers includingLyly,Lodge,GreeneandSidney.[90]These plays (in the words of Reginald Foakes) "create a world dominated by chance ... in which we are attuned to delight in and wonder at the unexpected."[92]

LikeThe Comedy of Errors,The Tempestroughly adheres to theunitiesof time, place, and action.[93]Shakespeare's other plays rarely respected the three unities, taking place in separate locations miles apart and over several days or even years.[94]Of Shakespeare's other late romances, for example,The Winter's Talecontains a gap of sixteen years, andCymbeline'saction veers between Britain and Italy.[95]In contrast,The Tempest'sevents unfold in real time before the audience, taking around three hours.[96][97][95]All action is unified into one basic plot: Prospero's struggle to regain his dukedom; it is also confined to one place, a fictional island.

The action takes place on an enchanted island ruled by Prospero, which must be located in the Mediterranean Sea, since it is encountered by travelers attempting to sail fromTunistoNaples.[98][99]However it is often thought of in subsequent criticism as being in the North Atlantic: partly because of the play's association with the wreck of the Sea Venture (see "Sources" above) and Ariel's suggestion of its proximity to the "still-vexed Bermoothes"[100]both of which relate it toBermuda, but also because of the colonial context of the play - and the way in which it subsequently came to be viewed by postcolonial critics - which suggest a setting in theNew World.[101][102]Also indicative of a New World setting are the name of Sycorax's god,Setebos, which derives from South America, and the source of Gonzalo's Utopia inMontaigne'sessayOf The Cannibals(see also "Sources" above).[103]

Throughout the critical history of the play until the mid-twentieth century, Prospero was generally regarded as an admirable figure: "prickly but essentially lovable" (in the words of Martin Butler).[104]But in more recent criticism and performance he has come to be seen as self-doubting and controlling and his attitude one of (in Martin Butler's words again) "suspicion, strain and paranoia".[105]

This shift in the attitude of critics is partly due to the absence of soliloquies in which Prospero can make his feelings known to the audience. Did he always intend to forgive his enemies, for example, or is his statement that "the rarer action is in virtue than in vengeance"[106]a conclusion he reaches during the currency of the play?[107]But it also reflects changing moral and political assumptions about the nature of rule, and of family.[107]

The Tempestis one of the plays (alongsideThe Merchant of VeniceandOthello) most analysed in aPostcolonialcontext,[108]and indeed is considered to be the work upon which postcolonial studies first took root.[109]The play has become, in the words of Peter Hulme, "emblematic of the founding years of England's colonialism".[110]From a postcolonial perspective, Prospero is seen as having imported to the island the social and moral structures of Milan (meaning, for early audiences, of London) by seizing rule, and making slaves of its inhabitants Caliban and Ariel.[111]

Traditionally, it was common to viewThe Tempestas an allegory of artistic creativity, with Prospero as all-knowing and benevolent.[112]Beginning in about 1950, with the publication ofPsychology of ColonizationbyOctave Mannoni, postcolonial theorists have increasingly appropriatedThe Tempestand reinterpreted it in light of postcolonial theory. This new way of looking at the text explored the effect of the "coloniser" (Prospero) on the "colonised" (Ariel and Caliban). Although Ariel is often overlooked in these debates in favour of the more intriguing Caliban, he is nonetheless an essential component of them.[113]So, in the 1960s and 1970s, Caliban's "This island's mine... which thou tak'st from me"[114]became a rallying-cry for African and Caribbean intellectuals.[112]

But critics such as Meredith Anne Skura have pointed out the limits of the postcolonial approach, referencing its projection backwards onto a play from the 1610s of historical events which happened later, and stressing the point that, in the story, Prospero does not choose to colonise the island, but runs aground there after being set adrift.[115]

Feminist interpretations ofThe Tempestconsider the play in terms of gender roles and relationships among the characters on stage, and consider how concepts of gender are constructed and presented by the text, and explore the supporting consciousnesses and ideologies, all with an awareness of imbalances and injustices.[116]Two early feminist interpretations ofThe Tempestare included in Anna Jameson'sShakespeare's Heroines(1832) and Mary Clarke'sThe Girlhood of Shakespeare's Heroines(1851).[117][118]

The Tempestis a play created in a male dominated culture and society, a gender imbalance the play explores metaphorically by having only one major female role, Miranda. Miranda is fifteen, intelligent, naive, and beautiful. The only humans she has ever encountered in her life are male. Prospero sees himself as her primary teacher, and asks if she can remember a time before they arrived to the island—he assumes that she cannot. When Miranda has a memory of "four or five women" tending to her younger self (1.2.44–47), it disturbs Prospero, who prefers to portray himself as her only teacher, and the absolute source of her own history—anything before his teachings in Miranda's mind should be a dark "abysm", according to him. (1.2.48–50) The "four or five women" Miranda remembers may symbolize the young girl's desire for something other than only men.[119][120]

Other women, such as Caliban's motherSycorax, Miranda's mother and Alonso's daughter Claribel, are only mentioned. Because of the small role women play in the story in comparison to other Shakespeare plays,The Tempesthas attracted much feminist criticism. Miranda is typically viewed as being completely deprived of freedom by her father. Her only duty in his eyes is to remain chaste. Ann Thompson argues that Miranda, in a manner typical of women in a colonial atmosphere, has completely internalised the patriarchal order of things, thinking of herself as subordinate to her father.[121]