On a cold day, the fictional 304th New York Infantry Regiment awaits battle beside a river. Private Henry Fleming, a young teenaged recruit, remembers his romantic reasons for enlisting as well as his mother's resulting protests, wonders whether he will remain brave in the face of fear or turn and run back. He is comforted by one of his friends from home, Jim Conklin, who admits that he would run from battle if his fellow soldiers also fled. During the regiment's first battle, Confederate soldiers charge, but are repelled. The enemy quickly regroups and attacks again, this time forcing some of the unprepared Union soldiers to flee. Fearing the battle is a lost cause, Henrydesertshis regiment. It is not until after he reaches the rear of the army that he overhears a general announcing the Union's victory.

Ashamed, Henry escapes into a nearby forest, where he discovers a decaying body in a peaceful clearing. In his distress, he hurriedly leaves the clearing and stumbles upon a group of injured men returning from battle. One member of the group, a "tattered soldier", asks Henry where he is wounded, but the youth dodges the question. Among the group is Conklin, who has been shot in the side and is suffering delirium from blood loss. Jim eventually dies of his injury, defiantly resisting aid from his friend, and an enraged and helpless Henry runs from the wounded soldiers. He next comes upon a retreating column that is in disarray. In the panic, a man hits Henry on the head with his rifle, wounding him. Exhausted, hungry, thirsty, and now wounded, Henry decides to return to his regiment regardless of his shame. When he arrives at camp, the other soldiers believe his injury resulted from a grazing bullet during battle. The other men care for the youth, dressing his wound.

The next morning Henry goes into battle for the third time. His regiment encounters an isolated Confederate unit, and in the ensuing fight Henry proves to be a capable soldier, comforted by the belief that his previous cowardice had not been noticed, as he "had performed his mistakes in the dark, so he was still a man".[20]Afterward, while looking for a stream from which to obtain water with a friend, he discovers from his commanding officer that his regiment has a lackluster reputation. The officer speaks casually about sacrificing the 304th because they are nothing more than "mule drivers" and "mud diggers". With no other regiments to spare, the general orders his men forward.

In the final battle, Henry acts as theflag-bearerafter the color sergeant falls. A line of Confederates, hidden behind a fence beyond a clearing, shoots with impunity at Henry's regiment, which is ill-covered in the tree-line. Facing withering fire if they stay and disgrace if they retreat, the officers order a charge. Unarmed, Henry leads the men while entirely escaping injury. Most of the Confederates run before the regiment arrives, and four of the remaining men are takenprisoner. The novel closes with the following passage:

Although Crane once wrote in a letter, "You can tell nothing ... unless you are in that condition yourself," he wroteThe Red Badge of Couragewithout any experience of war.[22]He would, however, later serve as awar correspondentduring theGreco-TurkishandSpanish–American Wars. Nevertheless, the realistic portrayal of the battlefield inThe Red Badge of Couragehas often misled readers into thinking that Crane (despite being born six years after the end of the Civil War) was himself a veteran. While trying to explain his ability to write about battle realistically, Crane stated: "Of course, I have never been in a battle, but I believe that I got my sense of the rage of conflict on the football field, or else fighting is a hereditary instinct, and I wrote intuitively; for the Cranes were a family of fighters in the old days".[23]

Crane drew from a variety of sources in order to realistically depict battle.Century's"Battles and Leaders" series served as direct inspiration for the novel, and one story in particular (Warren Lee Goss's "Recollections of a Private") contains many parallels to Crane's work.[24]Thomas Beerwrote in his problematic 1923 biography[25]that Crane was challenged by a friend to writeThe Red Badge of Courageafter having announced that he could do better thanÉmile Zola'sLa Débâcle. This anecdote, however, has not been substantiated.[26]The metaphor of the "red badge of courage" itself may have been inspired by true events; historian Cecil D. Eby, Jr. noted that Union officerPhilip Kearnyinsisted his troops wear bright redunit insignia patches, which became known as marks of valor and bravery.[27]While the 304th New York Volunteer Infantry is fictional, many strategies and occurrences in the novel echo actual events during the Civil War. Details concerning specific campaigns during the war, especially regarding battle formations and actions during theBattle of Chancellorsville, have been noted by critics.[28]

It is believed that Crane listened to war stories in the town square ofPort Jervis, New York(where his family at times resided)[29]told by members of the124th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment, commonly known as the Orange Blossoms.[10]The Orange Blossoms first saw battle at Chancellorsville, which is believed by local historians to have been the inspiration for the battle depicted inThe Red Badge of Courage.[30]Furthermore, there was a Private James Conklin who served in the 124th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment,[31]and Crane's short story "The Veteran", which was published inMcClure's Magazinethe year afterThe Red Badge of Courage,[32]depicts an elderly Henry Fleming who specifically identifies his first combat experience as having occurred at Chancellorsville.[33]