Jurgis Rudkus marries his sweetheart, Ona Lukoszaite, in a joyous traditional Lithuanian wedding feast. They and their extended family have recently immigrated to Chicago due to financial hardship inLithuania, then part of theRussian Empire. They have heard that America offers freedom and higher wages and have come to pursue theAmerican Dream.

Despite having lost much of their savings being conned on the trip to Chicago, and then having to pay for the wedding—and despite the disappointment of arriving at a crowded boarding house—Jurgis is initially optimistic about his prospects in Chicago. Young and strong, he believes that he is immune to the misfortunes that have befallen others in the crowd. He is swiftly hired by a meatpacking factory; he marvels at its efficiency, even while witnessing the cruel treatment of the animals.

The women of the family answer an ad for a four-room house. Ona, who came from an educated background, figures that they could easily afford it with the jobs that Jurgis, proud Marija, and ambitious Jonas have gotten. While they discover at the showing that the neighborhood is unkempt and the house doesn't live up to the advertisement, they are taken in by the slickness and fluentLithuanianof the real estate agent and sign a contract for the house.

However, with the help of an old Lithuanian neighbor, they discover several unexpected expenses in the contract that they must pay every month on time, or else faceeviction—the fate of most home buyers in the neighborhood. To meet these costs, Ona and thirteen-year-old Stanislovas (whom the family had wished to send to school) must take up work as well.

While sickness befalls them often, they cannot afford not to work. That winter, Jurgis's father, weakened by exposure to chemicals and the elements at his job, dies of illness.

Some levity is brought to their lives by the arrival of a musician, named Tamoszius, who courts Marija, and the birth of Jurgis and Ona's first child. However, this happiness is tempered when Ona must return to work one week after giving birth, and Marija is laid off in a seasonal cutback. Jurgis attends union meetings passionately; he realizes that he had been taken in by a vote-buying scheme when he was new to Chicago, learns that the meat factories deliberately use diseased meat, and furthermore that workers frequently come down with ailments related to their dangerous and unsanitary work.

Work becomes more demanding as wages fall; the working members of the family suffer a series of injuries. Amid this hardship, Jonas deserts the family, leaving them no choice but to send two children to work as newspaper boys. The youngest child, a handicapped toddler, dies of food poisoning; only his mother grieves his death.

After recovering from his injury, Jurgis takes the least desirable job at a fertilizer mill. In misery, he begins drinkingalcohol. He becomes suspicious of his pregnant wife's failure to return home on several nights. Ona eventually confesses that her boss, Phil Connor raped her, after which, by threatening to fire andblacklisteveryone in her family, he managed to coerce her into a continuingsexual relationship.

Jurgis furiously attacks Connor at his factory, but half a dozen men tear him away. While in prison awaiting trial, he realizes it is Christmas Eve. The next day, his cellmate, Jack Duane, tells him about his criminal ventures and gives him his address. At trial, Connor testifies that he had fired Ona for "impudence" and easily denies Jurgis's account; the judge dismissively sentences Jurgis to thirty days in prison plus court fees.

Stanislovas visits Jurgis in prison and tells him of the family's increasing destitution. After Jurgis serves his term (plus three days for his inability to pay the fees), he walks through the slush for an entire day to get home, only to find that the house had been remodeled and sold to another family. He learns from their old neighbor that, despite all of the sacrifices they had made, his family had been evicted and had returned to the boarding house.

Upon arriving at the boarding house, Jurgis heard Ona screaming. She is inpremature labor, and Marija explains that the family had no money for a doctor. Jurgis convinces amidwifeto assist, but it is too little too late; the infant is dead, and with one last look at Jurgis, Ona dies shortly afterward. The children return with a day's wages; Jurgis spends all of it to get drunk for the night.

The next morning, Ona's stepmother begs Jurgis to think of his surviving child. With his son in mind, he endeavors again to gain employment despite his blacklisting. For a time, the family gets by and Jurgis delights in his son's first attempts at speech. One day, Jurgis arrives home to discover that his son had drowned after falling off a rotting boardwalk into the muddy streets. Without shedding a tear, he walks away from Chicago.

Jurgis wanders the countryside while the weather is warm, working, foraging, and stealing for food, shelter, and drink. In the fall, he returns to Chicago, sometimes employed, sometimes atramp. While begging, he chances upon an eccentric rich drunk—the son of the owner of the first factory where Jurgis had worked—who entertains him for the night in his luxurious mansion and gives him aone-hundred-dollar bill(worth the equivalent of about $3,500 as of October 2024). Afterward, when Jurgis spends the bill at a bar, thebartendercheats him. Jurgis attacks the bartender and is sentenced to prison again, where he once again meets Jack Duane. This time, without a family to anchor him, Jurgis decides to fall in with him.

Jurgis helps Duane mug a well-off man; his split of the loot is worth over twenty times a day's wages from his first job. Though his conscience is pricked by learning of the man's injuries in the next day's papers, he justifies it to himself as necessary in a "dog-eat-dog" world. Jurgis then navigates the world of crime; he learns that this includes a substantial corruption of the police department. He becomes a vote fixer for a wealthy political powerhouse, Mike Scully, and arranges for many newSlavicimmigrants to vote according to Scully's wishes—as Jurgis once had. To influence those men, he had taken a job at a factory, which he continues as astrikebreaker. One night, by chance, he runs into Connor, whom he attacks again. Afterward, he discovers that his buddies cannot fix the trial as Connor is an important figure under Scully. With the help of a friend, he posts and skips bail.

With no other options, Jurgis returns to begging and chances upon a woman who had been a guest to his wedding. She tells him where to find Marija, and Jurgis heads to the address to find that it is abrothelbeing raided by the police. Marija tells him that she was forced to prostitute herself to feed the children after they had gotten sick, and Stanislovas—who had drunk too much and passed out at work—had been eaten by rats. After their speedy trial and release, Marija tells Jurgis that she cannot leave the brothel as she cannot save money and has become addicted to heroin, as is typical in the brothel'shuman trafficking.

Marija has a customer, so Jurgis leaves and finds a political meeting for a warm place to stay. He begins to nod off. A refined lady gently rouses him, saying, "If you would try to listen, comrade, perhaps you would be interested." Startled by her kindness and fascinated by her passion, he listens to the thundering speaker. Enraptured by his speech, Jurgis seeks out the orator afterward. The orator asks if he is interested insocialism.

A Polish socialist takes him into his home, conversing with him about his life and socialism. Jurgis returns home to Ona's stepmother and passionately converts her to socialism; she placatingly goes along with it only because it seems to motivate him to find work. He finds work in a small hotel that turns out to be run by a state organizer of the Socialist Party. Jurgis passionately dedicates his life to the cause of socialism.

Sinclair published the book in serial form between February 25, 1905, and November 4, 1905, inAppeal to Reason, thesocialistnewspaper that had supported Sinclair's undercover investigation the previous year. This investigation had inspired Sinclair to write the novel, but his efforts to publish the series as a book met with resistance. An employee atMacmillanwrote,

Five publishers rejected the work, deeming it too shocking for mainstream audiences.[6]Sinclair was about to self-publish a shortened version of the novel in a "Sustainer's Edition" for subscribers whenDoubleday, Pagecame on board. On February 28, 1906, the Doubleday edition was published simultaneously with Sinclair's. 5,000 appeared under the imprint of "The Jungle Publishing Company" with theSocialist Party’s symbol embossed on the cover, both using the same plates.[7]In the first six weeks, the book sold 25,000 copies.[8]

It has been in print ever since, including four more self-published editions, in 1920, 1935, 1942, 1945.[7]Sinclair dedicated the book "To the Workingmen of America".[9]

All works published in the United States before 1924 are in the public domain,[10]so there are free copies of the book available on websites such asProject Gutenberg[11]andWikisource.[12]

In 1988, St. Lukes Press, a division of Peachtree Publishers Ltd, published an edition titled "The Lost First Edition of Upton Sinclair's The Jungle" based on the original serialized version of "The Jungle" as seen in "Appeal to Reason". This version was edited by Gene Degruson of Pittsburg State University, based on a correspondence regarding the novel found in the basement of a farm inGirard, Kansas. The book included an introductory essay by DeGruson detailing the process of how he "restored" the text.[13]

In 2003,See Sharp Presspublished an edition based on the original serialization ofThe JungleinAppeal to Reason, which they described as the "Uncensored Original Edition" as Sinclair intended it. The foreword and introduction say that the commercial editions were censored to make their political message acceptable to capitalist publishers.[14]

Others argue that Sinclair had made the revisions of the original text himself, to make the novel more accurate and engaging for the reader, to correct the Lithuanian references, and to streamline the text to eliminate parts that would not appeal to the public, as Sinclair himself said in letters and his 1932 memoir,American Outpost.[7]

The publisher hyped the book.Isaac F. Marcossonhandled publicity. He sent the entire book in page proof to theAssociated Press, theUnited Press, and theHearstnewspaper chain, as well as to the managing editors of each of the leading big-city newspapers. He told them they were free to quote at length when the book was officially released.  TheMuckrakerpublishers and editors were hunting scandal and most newspapers responded eagerly with a sensational story that affected every reader.  In cities large and small all across the country the scandals were rehashed, often with page one coverage. The book sold tens of thousands of copies, and the newspapers reached millions.[15][16]The book produced a small fortune for Sinclair, who invested his early returns ina short-lived utopian settlement in New Jersey.[17]

The scandal brought Sinclair national fame.[18]He intended to expose "the inferno of exploitation [of the typical American factory worker at the turn of the 20th Century]",[19]but the reading public fixated on food safety as most pressing issue. Sinclair admitted his celebrity arose "not because the public cared anything about the workers, but simply because the public did not want to eat tubercular beef".[19]

Sinclair's account of workers falling intorenderingtanks and being ground along with animal parts into "Durham's Pure Leaf Lard" gripped the public—although it never happened.  Historians of the ethnic workers reject the  emphasis on their horrible lives and instead celebrate their successful rise in status and community building.[20][21][22][23]

The British politicianWinston Churchillpraised the book in a review.[24]Bertolt Brechttook up the theme of terrible working conditions at the Chicago Stockyards in his playSaint Joan of the Stockyards(German:Die heilige Johanna der Schlachthöfe), transportingJoan of Arcto that environment.

In 1933, the book became a target of theNazi book burningsdue to Sinclair's endorsement of socialism.[25]

PresidentTheodore Roosevelthad described Sinclair as a "crackpot" because of the writer's socialist positions.[26]He wrote privately to journalistWilliam Allen White, expressing doubts about the accuracy of Sinclair's claims: "I have an utter contempt for him. He is hysterical, unbalanced, and untruthful. Three-fourths of the things he said were absolute falsehoods. For some of the remainder there was only a basis of truth."[27]

After readingThe Jungle, Roosevelt agreed with some of Sinclair's conclusions. The president wrote "radical action must be taken to do away with the efforts of arrogant and selfish greed on the part of the capitalist."[28]He assigned the Labor CommissionerCharles P. Neilland social worker James Bronson Reynolds to go to Chicago to investigate some meat packing facilities. Contemporary humorist Finley Peter Dunnesatirized Roosevelt's reaction,writing a story about the president being served sausages and subsequently throwing them out the window of the White House.[29]

Learning about the visit, owners had their workers thoroughly clean the factories prior to the inspection, but Neill and Reynolds were still revolted by the conditions. Their oral report to Roosevelt supported much of what Sinclair portrayed in the novel, excepting the claim of workers falling into rendering vats.[30]Neill testified before Congress that the men had reported only "such things as showed the necessity for legislation."[31]In 1906, theBureau of Animal Industryissued a report rejecting Sinclair's most severe allegations, characterizing them as "intentionally misleading and false", "willful and deliberate misrepresentations of fact", and "utter absurdity".[32]

Roosevelt did not release the Neill–Reynolds Report for publication. His administration submitted it directly to Congress on June 4, 1906.[33]With powerful Republicans opposing reforms that would prove costly to the packers, a compromise deal was brokered by Roosevelt that gave the reformers much of what they wanted, but not all.[34]Public pressure led to the passage of theMeat Inspection Actand thePure Food and Drug Act. The latter established the Bureau of Chemistry, in 1930 renamed as theFood and Drug Administration.

Sinclair rejected the legislation, which he considered an unjustified boon to large meatpackers. The government and taxpayers would bear the costs of inspection, estimated at $30,000,000 annually.[35][36]In October 1906, he complained about the public's misunderstanding of the point of his book, inCosmopolitan Magazine, by saying, "I aimed at the public's heart, and by accident I hit it in the stomach."[37]

The firstfilm versionof the novel was made in 1914, but it has since beenlost.[38]

Saint Joan of the Stockyardsis a play set in Chicago written by the GermanmodernistplaywrightBertolt Brechtbetween 1929 and 1931, after the success of hismusicalThe Threepenny Operaand during the period of his radical experimental work with theLehrstücke. It is based on the musical that he co-authored withElisabeth Hauptmann,Happy End(1929).[39][40]

In July 2019,Penguin Random House'sTen Speed Graphicimprint published a version of the story, adapted and illustrated by Kristina Gehrmann and translated by Ivanka Hahnenberger.[41]