Bassanio, a youngVenetianof noble rank, wishes to woo the beautiful and wealthy heiress of Belmont,Portia. Having squandered his estate, he needs 3,000ducatsto subsidise his expenditures as a suitor. Bassanio approaches his friendAntonio, a wealthy merchant of Venice, who has previously and repeatedly bailed him out. Antonio agrees, but has no liquid cash as  his ships and merchandise are busy at sea toTripolis,the Indies,MexicoandEngland– he promises to cover a bond if Bassanio can find a lender, so Bassanio turns to the Jewish moneylender Shylock and names Antonio as the loan's guarantor.

Antonio has already antagonized Shylock through his outspokenantisemitismand because Antonio's habit of lending money without interest forces Shylock to charge lower rates. Shylock is at first reluctant to grant the loan, citing abuse he has suffered at Antonio's hand. He finally agrees to lend the sum to Bassanio without interest upon one condition: if Antonio were unable to repay it at the specified date, Shylock may take apoundof Antonio's flesh. Bassanio does not want Antonio to accept such a risky condition; Antonio is surprised by what he sees as the moneylender's generosity (no "usance" – interest – is asked for), and he signs the contract. With money in hand, Bassanio leaves for Belmont with his friend Gratiano, who has asked to accompany him. Gratiano is a likeable young man, but he is often flippant, overly talkative, and tactless. Bassanio warns his companion to exercise self-control, and the two leave for Belmont.

Meanwhile, in Belmont, Portia is awash with suitors. Her father left awillstipulating that each of her suitors must choose correctly from one of three caskets, made of gold, silver and lead respectively. Whoever picks the right casket wins Portia's hand. The first suitor, the Prince of Morocco, chooses the gold casket, interpreting its slogan, "Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire",[1]as referring to Portia. The second suitor, the conceited Prince of Aragon, chooses the silver casket, which proclaims, "Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves",[2]as he believes he is full of merit. Both suitors leave empty-handed, having rejected the lead casket because of the baseness of its material and the uninviting nature of its slogan, "Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath".[3]The last suitor is Bassanio, whom Portia wishes to succeed, having met him before. As Bassanio ponders his choice, members of Portia's household sing a song that says that "fancy" (not true love) is "It is engendered in the eye, / With gazing fed";[4]Bassanio chooses the lead casket and wins Portia's hand.

At Venice, Antonio's ships are reported lost at sea, so the merchant cannot repay the bond. Shylock has become more determined to exact revenge from Christians because his daughter Jessica eloped with the Christian Lorenzo and converted. She took a substantial amount of Shylock's wealth with her, as well as a turquoise ring which Shylock had been given by his late wife, Leah. Shylock has Antonio brought before court.

At Belmont, Bassanio receives a letter telling him that Antonio has been unable to repay the loan from Shylock. Portia and Bassanio marry, as do Gratiano and Portia's handmaid Nerissa. Bassanio and Gratiano leave for Venice, with money from Portia, to save Antonio's life by offering the money to Shylock. Unknown to Bassanio and Gratiano, Portia sent her servant, Balthazar, to seek the counsel of Portia's cousin, Bellario, a lawyer, atPadua.

The climax of the play is set in the court of theDuke of Venice. Shylock refuses Bassanio's offer of 6,000 ducats, twice the amount of the loan. He demands his pound of flesh from Antonio. The Duke, wishing to save Antonio but unable to nullify a contract, refers the case to a visitor. He identifies himself as Balthazar, a young male "doctor of the law", bearing a letter of recommendation to the Duke from the learned lawyer Bellario. The doctor is Portia in disguise, and the law clerk who accompanies her is Nerissa, also disguised as a man. As Balthazar, Portia in afamous speechrepeatedly asks Shylock to show mercy, advising him that mercy "is twice blest: / It blesseth him that gives and him that takes."[5]However, Shylock adamantly refuses any compensations and insists on the pound of flesh.

As the court grants Shylock his bond and Antonio prepares for Shylock's knife, Portia deftly appropriates Shylock's argument for "specific performance". She says that the contract allows Shylock to remove only theflesh, not the blood, of Antonio.(seequibble)Thus, if Shylock were to shed any drop of Antonio's blood, his "lands and goods" would be forfeited under Venetian laws. She tells him that he must cut precisely one pound of flesh, no more, no less; she advises him that "if the scale do turn / But in the estimation of a hair, / Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate."[6]

Defeated, Shylock consents to accept Bassanio's offer of money for the defaulted bond: first his offer to pay "the bond thrice", which Portia rebuffs, telling him to take his bond, and then merely the principal; but Portia also prevents him from doing this, on the ground that he has already refused it "in the open court". She cites a law under which Shylock, as a Jew and therefore an "alien", having attempted to take the life of a citizen, has forfeited his property, half tothe governmentand half to Antonio, leaving his life at the mercy of the Duke.  The Duke spares Shylock's life and says he may remit the forfeiture. Portia says the Duke may waive the state's share, but not Antonio's. Antonio says he is content that the state waive its claim to half Shylock's wealth if he can have his one-half share "in use" until Shylock's death, when the principal would be given to Lorenzo and Jessica. Antonio also asks that "for this favour" Shylock convert to Christianity and bequeath his entire estate to Lorenzo and Jessica. The Duke then threatens to recant his pardon of Shylock's life unless he accepts these conditions. Shylock, re-threatened with death, accepts with the words, "I am content."[7]

Bassanio does not recognise his disguised wife, but offers to give a present to the supposed lawyer. First she declines, but after he insists, Portia requests his ring and Antonio's gloves. Antonio parts with his gloves without a second thought, but Bassanio gives the ring only after much persuasion from Antonio, as earlier in the play he promised his wife never to lose, sell or give it. Nerissa, as the lawyer's clerk, succeeds in likewise retrieving her ring from Gratiano, who does not see through her disguise.

At Belmont, Portia and Nerissa taunt and pretend to accuse their husbands before revealing they were really the lawyer and his clerk in disguise (V). After all the other characters make amends, Antonio learns from Portia that three of his ships were not stranded and have returned safely after all.

The forfeit of a merchant's deadlybondafter standing surety for a friend's loan was a common tale in England in the late 16th century.[8]In addition, the test of the suitors at Belmont, the merchant's rescue from the "pound of flesh" penalty by his friend's new wife disguised as a lawyer, and her demand for the betrothal ring in payment are all elements present in the 14th-century taleIl PecoronebyGiovanni Fiorentino, which was published in Milan in 1558.[9]Elements of the trial scene are also found inThe OratorbyAlexandre Sylvane, published in translation in 1596.[8]The story of the three caskets can be found inGesta Romanorum, a collection of tales probably compiled at the end of the 13th century.[10]

The date of composition ofThe Merchant of Veniceis believed to be between 1596 and 1598. The play was mentioned byFrancis Meresin 1598, so it must have been familiar on the stage by that date. The title page of the first edition in 1600 states that it had been performed "divers times" by that date. Salerino's reference to his ship theAndrew(I, i, 27) is thought to be an allusion to the Spanish shipSt. Andrew,captured by the English atCádizin 1596. A date of 1596–97 is considered consistent with the play's style.[citation needed]

The play was entered in theRegisterof theStationers Company, the method at that time of obtainingcopyrightfor a new play, byJames Robertson 22 July 1598 under the title "the Marchaunt of Venyce or otherwise called the Jewe of Venyce."[11]On 28 October 1600 Roberts transferred his right to the play to the stationerThomas Heyes; Heyes published the firstquartobefore the end of the year. It was printed again in 1619, as part of William Jaggard's so-calledFalse Folio. (Later, Thomas Heyes' son and heir Laurence Heyes asked for and was granted a confirmation of his right to the play, on 8 July 1619.) The 1600 edition is generally regarded as being accurate and reliable. It is the basis of the text published in the 1623First Folio, which adds a number of stage directions, mainly musical cues.[12]

The play is frequently staged, but is potentially troubling to modern audiences because of its central themes, which can easily appearantisemitic. Modern critics argue over the play's stance on the Jews and Judaism. American literary criticHarold Bloomargued in 1998 that "one would have to be blind, deaf and dumb not to recognise that Shakespeare's grand, equivocal comedyThe Merchant of Veniceis nevertheless a profoundly anti-semitic work".[13]

English society in the Elizabethan and Jacobean era has been described as "judeophobic".[14]English Jewshad beenexpelledunderEdward Iin 1290 and were not permitted to return until 1656 under the rule ofOliver Cromwell. PoetJohn Donne, who was Dean ofSt Paul's Cathedraland a contemporary of Shakespeare, gave a sermon in 1624 perpetuating theBlood Libel– the entirely unsubstantiated antisemitic lie that Jews ritually murdered Christians to drink their blood and achieve salvation.[15]In Venice and in some other places, Jews were required to wear a yellow or red hat at all times in public to make sure that they were easily identified, and had to live in a ghetto.[16]

Shakespeare's play may be seen as a continuation of this tradition.[17]The title page of theQuartoindicates that the play was sometimes known asThe Jew of Venicein its day, which suggests that it was seen as similar to Marlowe's early 1590s workThe Jew of Malta. One interpretation of the play's structure is that Shakespeare meant to contrast the mercy of the main Christian characters with the Old Testament vengefulness of a Jew, who lacks the religiousgraceto comprehend mercy. Similarly, it is possible that Shakespeare meant Shylock'sforced conversionto Christianity to be a "happy ending" for the character, as, to some Christian audiences, it saves his soul and allows him to enter Heaven.[18][page range too broad]

Regardless of what Shakespeare'sauthorial intentmay have been, the play has been made use of by antisemites throughout the play's history. TheNazisused the usurious Shylock for their propaganda. Shortly afterKristallnachtin 1938,The Merchant of Venicewas broadcast for propagandistic ends over the German airwaves. Productions of the play followed inLübeck(1938),Berlin(1940), and elsewhere within the Nazi territory.[19][page needed]

In a series of articles calledObserver, first published in 1785, British playwrightRichard Cumberlandcreated a character named Abraham Abrahams, who is quoted as saying, "I verily believe the odious character of Shylock has brought little less persecution upon us, poor scattered sons ofAbraham, than theInquisitionitself."[20]Cumberland later wrote a successful play,The Jew(1794), in which his title character,Sheva, is portrayed sympathetically, as both a kindhearted and generous man. This was the first known attempt by a dramatist to reverse the negative stereotype that Shylock personified.[21]

Thedepiction of Jews in literaturethroughout the centuries bears the close imprint of Shylock. With slight variations much of English literature up until the 20th century depicts the Jew as "a monied, cruel, lecherous, avaricious outsider tolerated only because of his golden hoard".[22]