The novel opens in the mid-1890s, with aliens onMarsplotting aninvasion of Earthbecause their own world is becoming uninhabitable due to cooling and old age. The main narrative ("The Great Disillusionment") takes place in the early 20th century, in the summer, when an object thought to be ameteorlands onHorsell Common, near the narrator's home. It turns out to be an artificial cylinder that was launched towards Earth several months earlier as Earth and Mars approachedopposition. Several Martians emerge and appear to struggle with Earth's gravity and unfamiliar atmosphere. When a human delegation approaches the cylinder waving awhite flag, the Martians incinerate them using a heat ray. The crowd flees, and that evening a large military force surrounds the cylinder.

The next day, the narrator takes his wife to safety inLeatherheadby means of adog-cartrented from the local pub landlord but then turns back so that he can return it. That night, he sees a three-legged Martian"fighting-machine"(tripod), armed with a heat-ray and achemical weapon: the poisonous "black smoke". Tripods have wiped out the human soldiers around the cylinder and destroyed most ofWoking. The narrator approaches his own house and finds the landlord dead in the front garden from inhaling the black smoke. While keeping watch from an upper floor window, he offers shelter to anartillerymanwho has fled after his battery was wiped out attacking the cylinder. The narrator and the artilleryman try to escape back towards Leatherhead but are separated during a Martian attack betweenSheppertonandWeybridge. As refugees try to cross theRiver Wey, the army is able to destroy a tripod with concentrated artillery fire, and the Martians retreat. The narrator travels toWalton, where he meets an unnamedcurate.

The Martians attack again, and people begin to flee London, including the narrator's brother, who travels with his neighbor, Mrs. Elphinstone, and her sister-in-law to keep them safe. They reach the coast and buy passage toContinental Europeon a makeshift fleet of refugee ships. Tripods attack, but atorpedo ram,HMSThunder Child, destroys two of them before being destroyed itself (a third is either destroyed in the detonation of the ship's ammunition stores, or flees unseen in the resultant smoke), and the evacuation fleet escapes. Soon, all organised resistance collapses, and Martians roam the shattered landscape unhindered.

At the beginning of Book Two, the narrator and the curate witness a Martian machine seizing people and tossing them into a metal carrier. The narrator realises that the Martian invaders may have plans for their victims. When a fifth Martian cylinder lands, both men are trapped beneath the ruins of a manor house. The narrator learns from his observations how Martian anatomy works and how they use living creatures' blood to nourish themselves. The two men's relationship deteriorates as the curate slowly falls into despair, and when he tries to eat their remaining food supplies, the narrator knocks him unconscious. A passing Martian removes the curate's body, but the narrator escapes detection.

The Martians abandon the cylinder's crater, and the narrator emerges from the collapsed house and heads for West London. En route, he finds Martianred weedeverywhere, prickly vegetation spreading wherever there is abundant water, but notices that it is slowly dying. OnPutney Heath, he encounters the artilleryman again, but soon abandons him when the man tries to convince him that they should keep on fighting the Martians. Driven mad by his trauma, he finally attempts suicide by approaching a stationary fighting machine onPrimrose Hill. To his surprise, he discovers that all the Martians have been killed by an onslaught of earthlypathogens, to which they had no immunity.

The narrator suffers anervous breakdownand is nursed back to health by a kind family. Eventually, he returns to Woking, and discovers that his wife has survived. In the last chapter, he reflects on the Martian invasion, its impact on humanity's view of itself and the future, and the effect that it has had on his mind.

The War of the Worldspresents itself as a factual account of the Martian invasion. It is one of the first works to theorise the existence of a race intelligent enough to invade Earth. The narrator is a middle-class writer of philosophical papers, reminiscent of Doctor Kemp inThe Invisible Man, with characteristics similar to author Wells at the time of writing.[citation needed]The reader learns little about the background of the narrator or indeed of anyone else in the novel. In fact, few of the principal characters are named, aside from the astronomer Ogilvy and Mrs. and Miss Elphinstone.[8]

Wells explained that he was exposed to the scenario of an empty and depopulated London almost simultaneously by a friend during a conversation and through the novelA Sensational Trance, by Forbes Dawson. Being attracted to the idea about writing a similar story himself, he tried to come up with a reason for why London was empty, and concluded the one that made the most sense was a mass exodus. When thinking about what could have caused the flight, he suddenly remembered his brother's idea about superior beings from another planet suddenly dropping from the sky. Wells' sonAnthony Westclaimed another seed for the novel can be found inThe Time Machine, where the narrator speculates about the possible future evolution of humanity, thinking it might could have "developed into something inhuman, unsympathetic, and overwhelmingly powerful". Next, the picture came to him that the aliens would arrive in interplanetary cylinders, an idea he borrowed from Jules Verne's stories about spaceflight. When deciding from what planet, he picked Mars, both because it was the one most similar to Earth, and because scientists back then wrongly assumed Mars was older than Earth, and therefore the Martians would have a longer evolutionary history than humans, having evolved into much more advanced creatures.[9]

Wells was trained as a science teacher during the latter half of the 1880s. One of his teachers wasThomas Henry Huxley, a major advocate ofDarwinism. Wells later taught science, and his first book was a biology textbook.[10][11]Much of his work makes  contemporary ideas of science and technology easily understandable.[12]

The scientific fascinations of the novel are established in the opening chapter. The narrator views Mars through a telescope, and Wells offers the image of the superior Martians having observed human affairs, as though watching tiny organisms through a microscope. In August 1894, a French astronomer reported sightings of a "strange light" on Mars.[13]Wells used this observation to open the novel, imagining these lights to be the launching of the Martian cylinders toward Earth.[8]

Italian astronomerGiovanni Schiaparelliobserved features on Mars in 1878, which he calledcanali(Italian for "channels"). In 1895, American astronomerPercival Lowellspeculated in his bookMarsthat these might be irrigation channels, constructed by a sentient life form to support existence on an arid, dying world.[8][14]The novel also explores ideas related toCharles Darwin's theory ofnatural selection.[15]

In 1896, Wells published an essay on 'Intelligence on Mars' in theSaturday Review, setting out ideas about life on Mars. Wells speculates on the nature of Martian inhabitants and how their evolutionary progress might compare to humans.[16][17]These ideas are used almost unchanged inThe War of the Worlds.[8][16]

In 1895, Wells married Catherine Robbins, and moved with her toWokingin Surrey. There, he spent his mornings walking or cycling in the countryside, and his afternoons writing. He used these bicycle tours to find places he would refer to in his novel. He wrote in his autobiography that he “wheeled about the district marking down suitable places and people for destruction by my Martians”.[18][19]A 23 feet (7.0 m) high sculpture of a tripod fighting machine, entitledThe Woking Martian, based on descriptions in the novel stands in Crown Passage close to the local railway station in Woking, designed and constructed in 1998 by artist Michael Condron. Fifty meters further up thepedestrianised streetis a concrete and brick representation of a Martian cylinder.[20]

Wells's depiction of late Victorian suburban culture in the novel was an accurate representation of his own experiences at the time.[21]In the late 19th century, theBritish Empirewas the predominant colonial power on the globe, making its domestic heart a poignant and terrifying starting point for an invasion by Martians with their own imperialist agenda.[22]Wells also drew on a common fear that emerged in the years approaching the turn of the century, known as thefin de siècleor 'end of the age', which anticipated an apocalypse occurring at midnight on the last day of 1899.[3]

In the late 1890s it was common for novels to be serialised in magazines or newspapers before publication in full, with each part of the serialisation ending on acliffhangerto entice audiences to buy the next issue. This practice was familiar fromCharles Dickens' novels earlier in the 19th century.The War of the Worldswas first serialised in the United Kingdom inPearson's Magazinefrom April to December 1897.[23]Wells was paid £200 and Pearsons demanded to know the ending of the piece before committing to publish it.[24]The complete volume was first published byHeinemannin 1898 and has been in print ever since,[25]although several editions exist. The 1924 Atlantic edition is considered the definitive text used for reprints. In addition, a revised version for schools was first published by Heinemann in 1951.[26]

Two unauthorised serialisations of the novel were published in the United States prior to publication of the novel. The first was in theNew York Evening Journalwhere the story was published asFighters from Marsor the War of the Worlds, located in a New York setting, between December 1897 and January 1898.[27]The second version had the Martians landing near and aroundBoston, and was published byThe Boston PostasFighters from Mars, or the War of the Worlds in and near Bostonin 1898.[10]Even though these versions are considered unauthorised, Hughes and Geduld speculate that Wells may inadvertently have agreed to the serialisation in theNew York Evening Journal.[2]These two versions of the story were followed byEdison's Conquest of MarsbyGarrett P. Serviss.

Holt, Rinehart & Winstonreprinted the book in 2000, paired withThe Time Machine, and commissioned Michael Koelsch to illustrate a new cover.[28]

The War of the Worldswas received favourably by both readers and critics.The Illustrated London Newswrote that the serialisation inPearson’s magazinehad "a very distinct success".[29]The story did even better as a book, and reviewers rated it as "the very best work he has yet produced",[29]and highlighting the story's originality in showing Mars in a new light through the concept of an alien invasion of Earth.[29]Writing forHarper's Weekly, Sidney Brooks admired Wells's writing style: "he has complete check over his imagination, and makes it effective by turning his most horrible of fancies into the language of the simplest, least startling denomination".[29]Praising Wells's "power of vivid realization",The Daily Newsreviewer wrote, "the imagination, the extraordinary power of presentation, the moral significance of the book cannot be contested".[29]There was, however, some criticism of the brutal nature of the events in the narrative.[30]

Between 1871 and 1914 more than 60 works of fiction for adult readers describing invasions of Great Britain were published. The original work wasThe Battle of Dorking(1871) byGeorge Tomkyns Chesney, which portrays a surprise German attack and landing on the south coast of England, made possible by the distraction of theRoyal Navyin colonial patrols and the army in an Irish insurrection. The German army makes short work of English militia and rapidly marches to London. This story was published inBlackwood's Magazinein May 1871 and was so popular that it was reprinted a month later as a pamphlet which sold 80,000 copies.[31][32]

There are clear plot similarities between Wells's book andThe Battle of Dorking. In both, a ruthless enemy makes a devastating surprise attack, with the British armed forces helpless to stop its relentless advance; and both involve the destruction of theHome Countiesof Southern England.[32]However,The War of the Worldstranscends the typical fascination ofinvasion literaturewith European politics and international disputes, with its introduction of an alien adversary.[33]

The invasion literature genre provided a familiar base from which to support the success ofThe War of the Worlds. It may also have proved an important foundation for Wells's ideas, as he had never seen or fought in a war.[34]

Many novels focusing on life on other planets written close to 1900 echoscientificideas of the time, includingPierre-Simon Laplace'snebular hypothesis,Charles Darwin'sscientific theoryofnatural selection, andGustav Kirchhoff's theory ofspectroscopy. These ideas combined to present the possibility that planets are alike in composition and conditions for the development of species, which would likely lead to the emergence of life at a suitable geological age in a planet's development.[35]

By the time Wells wroteThe War of the Worlds, there had been three centuries of observation of Mars through telescopes.Galileoobserved the planet's phases in 1610 and in 1666Giovanni Cassiniidentified the polar ice caps.[14]In 1878 Italian astronomerGiovanni Schiaparelliobserved geological features which he calledcanali(Italian for "channels"). This was mistranslated into English as "canals" which, being artificial watercourses, fuelled the belief in intelligent extraterrestrial life on the planet. This influenced American astronomerPercival Lowell.[36]In 1895 Lowell's bookMarsspeculated about an arid, dying landscape, whose inhabitants built canals to bring water from the polar caps to irrigate the remaining arable land. This encapsulated contemporary scientific ideas about conditions on the Red Planet at the timeThe War of the Worldswas written; ideas which persisted until they were tested by space missions, starting with theViking program, that found a lifeless world that was too cold for liquid water to exist.[14]

The Martians travel to the Earth incylinders, apparently fired from a hugespace gunon the surface of Mars. This was a common representation of space travel in the 19th century, and had also been used byJules VerneinFrom the Earth to the Moon. Modern scientific understanding renders this idea impractical, as it would be difficult to control the trajectory of the gun precisely, and the force of the explosion necessary to propel the cylinder from the Martian surface to the Earth would likely kill the occupants.[37]

The Martian invasion's principal weapons are the Heat-Ray and the poisonous Black Smoke. Their strategy includes the destruction of infrastructure such as armament stores, railways, and telegraph lines; it appears to be intended to cause maximum casualties, leaving humans without any will to resist. These tactics became more common as the 20th century progressed, particularly during the 1930s with the development of mobile weapons and technology capable ofsurgical strikeson key military and civilian targets.[38]

Wells's vision of a war bringing total destruction without moral limitations inThe War of the Worldswas not taken seriously by readers at the time of publication. He later expanded these ideas in the novelsWhen the Sleeper Wakes(1899),The War in the Air(1908), andThe World Set Free(1914). This kind oftotal wardid not become fully realised until theSecond World War.[39]

Critic Howard Black wrote that "In concrete details the Martian Fighting Machines as depicted by Wells have nothing in common withtanksordive bombers, but the tactical and strategic use made of them is strikingly reminiscent ofBlitzkriegas it would be developed by the German armed forces four decades later. The description of the Martians advancing inexorably, at lightning speed, towards London; the British Army completely unable to put up an effective resistance; the British government disintegrating and evacuating the capital; the mass of terrified refugees clogging the roads, all were to be precisely enacted in real lifeat 1940 France." Black regarded this 1898 depiction as far closer to the actual land fighting of World War II than Wells's much later workThe Shape of Things to Come(1933).[40]

Wells's description of chemical weapons – the Black Smoke used by the Martian fighting machines to kill human beings in great numbers – became a reality inWorld War I.[23]The comparison betweenlasersand the Heat-Ray was made as early as the later half of the 1950s when lasers were still in development. Prototypes of mobile laser weapons have been developed and are being researched and tested as a possible future weapon in space.[38]

Military theorists of the era, including those of theRoyal Navyprior to theFirst World War, had speculated about building a "fighting-machine" or a "landdreadnought". Wells later further explored the ideas of anarmoured fighting vehiclein his short story "The Land Ironclads".[41]There is a high level of science fiction abstraction in Wells's description of Martian automotive technology; he stresses how Martian machinery is devoid of wheels. They use "a complicated system of sliding parts" to produce movement, possess multiple whip-like tentacles for grasping, and paralleling animal motion, "quasi-muscles abounded in the crablike handling machine".[42]

H. G. Wells was a student ofThomas Henry Huxley, a proponent of the theory ofnatural selection.[43]In the novel, the conflict between humankind and the Martians is portrayed as asurvival of the fittest, with the Martians whose longer period of successful evolution on the older Mars has led to them developing a superior intelligence, able to create weapons far in advance of humans on the younger planet Earth, who have not had the opportunity to develop sufficient intelligence to construct similar weapons.[43]