Most ofThe Sorrows of Young Werther, a story about a young man's extreme response tounrequited love, is presented as a collection of letters written by Werther, a young artist of a sensitive and passionate temperament, to his friend Wilhelm. These give an intimate account of his stay in the fictional village of Wahlheim (based onGarbenheim[de;it;nl], nearWetzlar),[4]whose peasants have enchanted him with their simple ways. There he meets Charlotte, a beautiful young girl who takes care of her siblings after the death of their mother. Werther falls in love with Charlotte despite knowing beforehand that she is engaged to a man named Albert, eleven years her senior.[5]

Despite the pain it causes him, Werther spends the next few months cultivating a close friendship with them both. His sorrow eventually becomes so unbearable that he is forced to leave Wahlheim for Weimar, where he makes the acquaintance ofFräuleinvon B. He suffers great embarrassment when he forgetfully visits a friend and unexpectedly has to face there the weekly gathering of the entire aristocratic set. He is not tolerated and asked to leave since he is not a nobleman. He then returns to Wahlheim, where he suffers still more than before, partly because Charlotte and Albert are now married. Every day becomes a torturing reminder that Charlotte will never be able to requite his love. She, out of pity for her friend and respect for her husband, decides that Werther must not visit her so frequently. He visits her one final time, and they are both overcome with emotion after he recites to her a passage of his own translation ofOssian.

Even before that incident, Werther had hinted at the idea that one member of the love triangle—Charlotte, Albert or Werther himself—had to die to resolve the situation. Unable to hurt anyone else or seriously consider murder, Werther sees no other choice but to take his own life. After composing a farewell letter to be found after his death, he writes to Albert asking for his two pistols, on the pretext that he is going "on a journey". Charlotte receives the request with great emotion and sends the pistols. Werther then shoots himself in the head, but does not die until twelve hours later. He is buried between two linden trees that he had mentioned frequently in his letters. The funeral is not attended by any clergy, or by Albert or Charlotte. The book ends with an intimation that Charlotte may die of abroken heart: "I shall say nothing of . . . Charlotte's grief. . . . Charlotte's life was despaired of."

Wertherwas one of Goethe's few works aligned with the aesthetic, social and philosophical ideals that pervaded the German proto-Romanticmovement known asSturm und Drang, before he andFriedrich von Schillermoved intoWeimar Classicism. The novel was published anonymously, and Goethe distanced himself from it in his later years,[1]regretting the fame it had brought him and the consequent attention to his own youthful love ofCharlotte Buff, then already engaged toJohann Christian Kestner. Although he wroteWertherat the age of 24, it was all for which some of his visitors in his old age knew him. Goethe had changed his views of literature radically by then, even denouncing theRomanticmovement as "everything that is sick."[6]

Goethe described the powerful impact the book had on him, writing that even if Werther had been a brother of his whom he had killed, he could not have been more haunted by hisvengeful ghost. Yet, Goethe substantially reworked the book for the 1787 edition[1]and acknowledged the great personal and emotional influence thatThe Sorrows of Young Werthercould exert on forlorn young lovers who discovered it. He later commented to his secretaryJohann Peter Eckermannon January 2, 1824 (as it was recorded by Eckermann and published in his book,Gespräche mit Goethe):[7]

The Sorrows of Young Wertherturned Goethe, previously an unknown author, into a literary celebrity almost overnight.Napoleon Bonaparteconsidered it one of the great works of European literature, having written a Goethe-inspired soliloquy in his youth and carriedWertherwith him on hiscampaigning to Egypt. It also started the phenomenon known as "Werther Fever," which caused young men throughout Europe to dress in the clothing style described for Werther in the novel.[8][9]Items of merchandising such as prints, decoratedMeissen porcelainand even a perfume were produced.[10]Thomas Carlylecoined an epithet, "Wertherism",[11]to describe the self-indulgency of the age that the phenomenon represented.[12]When Goethe completed Werther, he likened his mood to one experienced “after a general confession, joyous and free and entitled to a new life”. For Goethe the Werther effect was a cathartic one, freeing himself from the despair in his life.[3]

The book reputedly also led to some of the first known examples ofcopycat suicide, also known as the "Werther effect". The men were often dressed in the same clothing "as Goethe's description of Werther and using similar pistols." Often the book was found at the scene of the suicide.[13]Rüdiger Safranski, a modern biographer of Goethe, dismisses the Werther Effect "as only a persistent rumor."[14]Nonetheless, this aspect of "Werther Fever" was watched with concern by the authorities – both the novel and the Werther clothing style were banned inLeipzigin 1775; the novel was also banned in Denmark and Italy.[10]It was also watched with fascination by fellow authors. One of these,Friedrich Nicolai, decided to create a satirical piece with a happy ending, entitledDie Freuden des jungen Werthers("The Joys of Young Werther"), in which Albert, having realized what Werther is up to, loaded chicken's blood into the pistol, thereby foiling Werther's suicide, and happily concedes Charlotte to him. After some initial difficulties, Werther sheds his passionate youthful side and reintegrates himself into society as a respectable citizen.[15]

Goethe, however, was not pleased with the "Freuden" and started a literary war with Nicolai that lasted all his life, writing a poem titled "Nicolai auf Werthers Grabe" ("Nicolai on Werther's grave"), in which Nicolai (here a passing nameless pedestrian) defecates on Werther's grave,[16]so desecrating the memory of a Werther from which Goethe had distanced himself in the meantime, as he had from theSturm und Drang. This argument was continued in his collection of short and critical poems theXenienand his playFaust.

TheHebrewtranslationיסורי ורתר הצעירwas popular among youths in the Zionist communities inBritish Mandate of Palestinein the 1930s and 1940s and was blamed for the suicide of several young men considered to have emulated Werther.[citation needed]