Hercule Poirot and Captain Hastings travel toMerlinville-sur-Mer,France, to meet Paul Renauld, who has requested their help. When they arrive, local police greet them with the news that Renauld was found dead that morning, stabbed in the back with a knife and left in a newly dug grave adjacent to a localgolf course. His wife, Eloise Renauld, claims masked men broke into the villa at 2am, tied her up, and took her husband away with them. Upon inspecting his body, Eloise collapses with grief at seeing her dead husband. Monsieur Giraud of the Sûreté leads the police investigation, and resents Poirot's involvement.

Poirot notes four key facts about the case: a piece of lead piping is found near the body; only three female servants were in the villa as both Renauld's son Jack and his chauffeur had been sent away; an unknown person visited the day before; and Renauld's immediate neighbour, Madame Daubreuil, had placed 200,000francsinto her bank account over recent weeks.

When Renauld's secretary, Gabriel Stonor, returns from England, he suggests blackmail, as his employer's past is a complete mystery prior to his career in South America. Meanwhile, Hastings unexpectedly encounters a young woman he had met on the train, known only as "Cinderella." She asks to see the crime scene and then disappears with the murder weapon.

Poirot discovers that the case is nearly identical to one from 22 years ago, in which a man called Georges Conneau and his lover, Madame Beroldy, conspired to kill Madame Beroldy's husband. Poirot travels to Paris to discover more about the Conneau murder. He finds a photograph of Madame Beroldy that shows that she is really Madame Daubreuil. On returning, Poirot learns that the body of a tramp has been found, stabbed through the heart with the murder weapon. An examination shows that he died before Renauld's murder from anepileptic seizureand was stabbed later.

Giraud arrests Jack on the basis that he wanted his father's money. Poirot reveals Renauld changed his will two weeks before his murder, disinheriting Jack. Jack is released from prison after Bella Duveen, an English stage performer he loves, confesses to the murder. Both had come across the body on the night of the murder, and each assumed the other had killed Renauld. Poirot reveals neither did, as the real killer was Marthe Daubreuil, daughter of the neighbor.

Poirot elaborates on his theory: Paul Renauld was really Georges Conneau, who returned to France after fleeing years ago. By misfortune, he found that his immediate neighbour would be Madame Beroldy, his old lover; like him, she had changed her identity, becoming Mme. Daubreuil. Blackmailed by her over his past, Renauld found his situation worsened when Jack becomes attracted to her daughter. When a tramp died on his grounds, he saw an opportunity to stage his own death and escape Mme Daubreuil. He would disfigure the tramp's face with the pipe, and then bury the tramp and the pipe beside the golf course, before fleeing the area by train. Anyone who would recognise that the body was not his would be sent away. However, the plan was discovered by Marthe, who followed Renauld and stabbed him after he dug the grave for the tramp's body. Her motive is money; Jack will inherit his father's fortune on his mother's death. To expose Marthe as the killer, Poirot asked Eloise to openly state she will disinherit Jack. Marthe attempts to kill Eloise in her villa but dies in a struggle with Hastings's Cinderella.

Marthe's mother disappears again. Jack and his mother plan to go to South America, joined by Hastings and his Cinderella, who is revealed as Bella Duveen's twin sister Dulcie.

The Times Literary Supplementreviewed the novel in its issue of 7 June 1923. The review compared the methods of detection of Poirot toSherlock Holmesand concluded favourably that the book "provides the reader with an enthralling mystery of an unusual kind".[5]

The New York Times Book Reviewof 25 March 1923 began, "Here is a remarkably good detective story which can be warmly commended to those who like that kind of fiction." After detailing the set-up of the story the review continued, "The plot has peculiar complications and the reader will have to be very astute indeed if he guesses who the criminal is until the last complexity has been unravelled. The author is notably ingenious in the construction and unravelling of the mystery, which develops fresh interests and new entanglements at every turn. She deserves commendation also for the care with which the story is worked out and the good craftsmanship with which it is written. Although there is not much endeavour to portray character, except in the case of M. Poirot, several of the personages are depicted with swiftly made expressive and distinctive lines."[6]

The unnamed reviewer inThe Observerof 10 June 1923 said, "WhenConan DoylepopularisedSherlock Holmesin theStrandof the 'nineties he lit such a candle as the publishers will not willingly let out. Not a week passes which does not bring a 'detective' story from one quarter or another, and several of the popular magazines rely mainly on that commodity. Among the later cultivators of this anything but lonely furrow the name of Agatha Christie is well in the front. If she has not the touch of artistry which madeThe Speckled BandandThe Hound of the Baskervillesthings of real horror, she has an unusual gift of mechanical complication." The reviewer went on to compare the novel withThe Mysterious Affair at Styles, which they called "a remarkable piece of work", but warned that "it is a mistake to carry the art of bewilderment to the point of making the brain reel". They did admit that "[n]o solution could be more surprising" and stated that the character of Poirot was "a pleasant contrast to most of his lurid competitors; and one even suspects a touch of satire in him."[7]

Robert Barnard: "Super-complicated early whodunit, set in the northerly fringes of France so beloved of the English bankrupt. Poirot pits his wits against a sneering sophisticate of a French policeman while Hastings lets his wander after an auburn-haired female acrobat. Entertaining for most of its length, but the solution is one of those 'once revealed, instantly forgotten' ones, where ingenuity has triumphed over common sense".[8]

In a modern work of literary criticism, Christie biographer Laura Thompson writes:

She notes as well that the book, the second novel featuring Poirot, is notable for a subplot in which Hastings falls in love, a development "greatly desired on Agatha's part... parcelling off Hastings to wedded bliss in the Argentine."[4]

The novel received its first true publication as a four-part serialisation in theGrand Magazinefrom December 1922 to March 1923 (Issues 214–217) under the title of "The Girl with the Anxious Eyes" before it was issued in book form by The Bodley Head in May 1923.[9]This was Christie's first published work for theGrand Magazinewhich went on to publish many of her short stories throughout the 1920s.

Christie'sAutobiographyrecounts how she objected to the illustration of thedustjacketof the UK first edition stating that it was both badly drawn and unrepresentative of the plot.[10]It was the first of many such objections she raised with her publishers over the dustjacket. It would appear that Christie won her argument over the dustjacket as the one she describes and objected to ("a man in his pyjamas, dying of an epileptic fit on a golf course") does not resemble the actual jacket which shows Monsieur Renauld digging the open grave on the golf course at night.

Christie dedicated her third book as follows:

Christie refers here to her first husband,Archibald Christie(1890–1962) from whom she was divorced in 1928.

The dustjacket front flap of the first edition carried no specially writtenblurb. Instead it carried quotes of reviews forThe Mysterious Affair at Styleswhilst the back jacket flap carried similar quotes forThe Secret Adversary.

The Murder on the Linkswas adapted for the stage by American playwrightSteven Dietzin 2021. Performed by an ensemble cast of six, with Poirot and Hastings played by either male or female actors, this serio-comic adaptation is scheduled to premiere in San Diego (North Coast Repertory Theatre) and at the Laguna Playhouse in 2023.[11]

The Murder on the Linkswas presented as a one-hour, thirty-minuteradio adaptationin theSaturday Night Theatrestrand onBBC Radio 4on 15 September 1990, the centenary of Christie's birth. It was repeated on 8 July 1991 and again in 2015.[12]John Moffatt starred as Poirot. The play's recording took place on 21 June 1989 atBroadcasting House. It was adapted byMichael Bakewelland produced and directed by Enyd Williams.

Cast:

An adaptation of the novel was made for the seriesAgatha Christie's Poiroton 11 February 1996. It was produced byCarnival Films, and starredDavid Suchetas Hercule Poirot, andHugh Fraseras Arthur Hastings. While much of the novel's plot was retained, the adaptation featured a number of changes, which included the setting being changed toDeauville, France, where filming took place on-site.[13][14][15]The wager between Poirot and  Giraud is changed; instead of 500 Francs,[16]the stakes are Giraud's famous pipe against Poirot's mustache. In the end, Poirot returns the pipe, observing that Giraud will think of him whenever he uses it. Jack is Paul's stepson who was adopted by him and took his last name, instead of being his biological son. The denouement is different. Bella is a singer, who introduces herself to Hastings as “Isabelle”. She still confuses things by confessing to the crime, but she no longer loves Jack. It is Stonor who shoots Marthe with her own gun when—as Poirot predicts—she breaks in and tries to kill Madame Renaud. Marthe's mother does not escape, but is arrested. There is no twin sister. Bella is now in love with Hastings, who is staying in Deauville to make sense of it all.  Poirot brings her to the promenade on the seaside, where they share a long kiss. Fade out.

Adaptor:Anthony HorowitzDirector:Andrew Grieve

Cast:

The second night ofMeitantei Akafuji Takashi(a two-night release in December 2005) was an adaptation ofThe Murder on the Links. The first night had adaptedThe A.B.C. Murders. The show starredShirō Itōas Takashi Akafuji, who represents the character of Poirot.[citation needed]

The seventh episode of the second season of the French television seriesLes Petits Meurtres d'Agatha Christiewas an adaptation of this novel. It aired in 2014.[citation needed]

The Murder on the Linkswas released byHarperCollinsas agraphic noveladaptation on 16 July 2007, adapted by François Rivière and illustrated by Marc Piskic (ISBN0-00-725057-6). This was translated from the edition first published in France byEmmanuel Proust éditionsin 2003, and then translated to English, published by HarperCollins in 2007.[17]