AVictorianEnglishman, identified only as theTime Traveller, tells his weekly dinner guests that he has experimental verification of a machine that can travel through time. He shows them what he says is a small model, and they watch it disappear. He says he has a big machine nearly finished in his laboratory, in which a person could travel through time. At dinner the following week, a weary, bedraggled Traveller recounts to his guests what he experienced on his journey to the future.

In thenew narrative, the Time Traveller goes into the future, observing things moving in quick motion around him. He sees his house disappear and turn into a lush garden. The Traveller stops inA.D.802,701, and meets the Eloi, a society of small, childlike humanoids. They live in small communities within large and futuristic yet deteriorating buildings, and adhere to afruit-based diet. His efforts to communicate with them are hampered by their lack of curiosity or discipline. They appear happy and carefree but fear the dark, particularly moonless nights. They give no response to nocturnal disappearances, possibly because they are so afraid of them. After exploring the area around the Eloi's residences, the Traveller reaches the top of a hill overlooking what was once London and finds the ruins of what once was ametropolis. He concludes that the entire planet became a garden, with little trace of human society or engineering from the hundreds of thousands of years prior, and thatcommunism[21]has at last been achieved. He also theorizes that intelligence springs from necessity; with no real challenges facing the Eloi, they have lost the spirit, intelligence, and physical fitness of humanity at its peak.

Returning to the site where he arrived, the Traveller finds his machine missing; he is confident that it at least has not traveled through time, as he had removed its levers. Later, he encounters the Morlocks,ape-liketroglodyteswho live in darkness underground and surface only at night. Deducing that they must have taken his time machine, he explores one of many "wells" that lead to the Morlocks' dwellings and discovers them operating the machinery and industry that makes the above-ground paradise of the Eloi possible. He realizes that the Morlocks control and feed upon the Eloi. The Traveller speculates that the human race has diverged into two species: the favored aristocracy has become the Eloi, and their mechanical servants have become the Morlocks.

Meanwhile, he rescues EloiWeenafrom drowning, as none of the other Eloi take any notice of her plight. The Traveller takes Weena with him on an expedition to "The Palace of Green Porcelain", a distant structure which turns out to be a derelict museum. Here, the Traveller finds fresh matches and fashions a crude weapon against Morlocks, whom he must fight to recover his machine. He plans to take Weena back to his own time to save her from the horrors of the future world. Because the tiring journey back to Weena's home is too much for them, they stop in the forest for the night. They are eventually attacked by Morlocks, and Weena faints. The Traveller escapes when a small fire he left behind them to repel the Morlocks turns into aforest fire; Weena and the Morlocks are lost in the blaze.

The Morlocks openthe Sphinxand use the machine as bait to capture the distraught Traveller, not understanding that he can use it to escape. He reattaches the levers before travelling further ahead to roughly 30 million years from his own time. There, he sees some of the last living things on a dying Earth: crab-like creatures wandering blood-red beaches chasing enormousbutterflies, in a world covered in lichenoid vegetation. He continues to make jumps forward through time, seeing Earth's rotation cease and the sun growlarger, redder, and dimmer, and the world falling silent and freezing as the last living things die out.

Overwhelmed, he returns to his own time, arriving at the laboratory just three hours after he originally left. He arrives late to his own dinner party, whereupon, after eating, the Traveller relates his adventures to his disbelieving visitors, producing as evidence two unusual white flowers Weena put in his pocket.

The original narrator relates that he returned to the Traveller's house the next day, finding him preparing for another journey and promising to return in a short time. After waiting for three years, however, the narrator says that the Traveller has not returned.

A section from the thirteenth chapter of the serial published inNew Review(May 1895, partway down p. 577 to p. 580, line 29)[22]does not appear in either of the 1895 editions of the book.[23][24][25]It was drafted at the suggestion of Wells's editor,William Ernest Henley, who wanted Wells to "oblige your editor" by lengthening the text with, among other things, an illustration of "the ultimate degeneracy" of humanity. "There was a slight struggle," Wells later recalled, "between the writer and W. E. Henley who wanted, he said, to put a little 'writing' into the tale. But the writer was in reaction from that sort of thing, the Henley interpolations were cut out again, and he had his own way with his text."[26]This portion of the story was published elsewhere as "The Final Men" (1940)[27]and "The Grey Man".[28]The deleted text was also published byForrest J Ackermanin an issue of the American edition ofPerry Rhodan.[citation needed]

The deleted text recounts an incident immediately after the Traveller's escape from the Morlocks. He finds himself in the distant future in a frost-coveredmoorlandwith simple grasses and black bushes, populated with furry, hopping herbivores resemblingkangaroos. He stuns or kills one with a rock, and upon closer examination realises they are probably the descendants of humans / Eloi / Morlocks. A gigantic, centipede-likearthropodapproaches and the Traveller flees into the next day, finding that the creature has apparently eaten the tiny humanoid. TheDover Press[29]andEaston Presseditions of the novella restore this deleted segment.[citation needed]

Significant scholarly commentary onThe Time Machinebegan from the early 1960s, initially contained in various broad studies of Wells's early novels (such as Bernard Bergonzi'sThe Early H.G. Wells: A Study of the Scientific Romances) and studies of utopias/dystopias in science fiction (such as Mark R. Hillegas'sThe Future as Nightmare: H.G. Wells and the Anti-Utopians). Much critical and textual work was done in the 1970s, including the tracing of the very complex publication history of the text, its drafts, and unpublished fragments.[citation needed]

A further resurgence in scholarship came around the time of the novella's centenary in 1995, and a major outcome of this was the 1995 conference and substantial anthology of academic papers, which was collected in print asH.G. Wells's Perennial Time Machine.[30]This publication then allowed the development of a guide-book for academic study at Master's and Ph.D. level:H.G. Wells's The Time Machine: A Reference Guide.[31]

The scholarly journalThe Wellsianhas published around twenty articles onThe Time Machine, and a U.S. academic journalThe Undying Fire, devoted to H.G. Wells studies, has published three articles since its inception in 2002.[citation needed][32]

According to Leon Stover in his bookThe Time Machine: An invention name, the nameEloiis the Hebrew plural forElohim, or lesser gods, in theOld Testament.[33]However, this derivation is unlikely as the word 'Elohim' is already in the plural, with the singular being 'eloah'.[34]

Wells's source for the nameMorlockis less clear. It may refer to theCanaanitegodMolochassociated with child sacrifice. The nameMorlockmay also be a play onmollocks– what miners might call themselves – or a Scots word for rubbish,[33]or a reference to theMorlacchicommunity in Dalmatia.[35]

The Time Machinecan be read as a symbolic novel. The time machine itself can be viewed as a symbol, and there are several symbols in the narrative, including the Sphinx, flowers, and fire.

The CBS radio anthologyEscapeadaptedThe Time Machinetwice, in 1948 starringJeff Corey, and again in 1950 starringLawrence Dobkinas the traveller. A script adapted by Irving Ravetch was used in both episodes. The Time Traveller was named Dudley and was accompanied by his skeptical friend Fowler as they travelled to the year 100,080.

In 1994, an audio drama was released on cassette and CD by Alien Voices, starringLeonard Nimoyas the Time Traveller (namedJohnin this adaptation) andJohn de Lancieas David Filby. John de Lancie's children, Owen de Lancie andKeegan de Lancie, played the parts of the Eloi. The drama is approximately two hours long and is more faithful to the story than several of the film adaptations. Some changes are made to reflect modern language and knowledge of science.

In 2000, Alan Young readThe Time Machinefor 7th Voyage Productions, Inc., in 2016 to celebrate the 120th Anniversary of H.G. Wells's novella.[37]

Robert Glenisterstarred as the Time Traveller, withWilliam GauntasH. G. Wellsin a new 100-minute radio dramatisation by Philip Osment, directed byJeremy Mortimeras part of a BBC Radio Science Fiction season. This was the first adaptation of the novella for British radio. It was first broadcast on 22 February 2009 onBBC Radio 3[38]and later published as a 2-CD BBC audio book.

The other cast members were:

The adaptation retained the nameless status of the Time Traveller and set it as a true story told to the young Wells by the time traveller, which Wells then re-tells as an older man to the US journalist, Martha, whilst firewatching on the roof ofBroadcasting Houseduringthe Blitz. It also retained the deleted ending from the novella as a recorded message sent back to Wells from the future by the traveller using a prototype of his machine, with the traveller escaping the anthropoid creatures to 30 million AD at the end of the universe before disappearing or dying there.

On 5 September 2017,Big Finish Productionsreleased an adaptation ofThe Time Machine. This adaptation was written byMarc Plattand starredBen Milesas the Time Traveller.

Platt explained in an interview that adaptingThe Time Machineto audio was not much different from writingDoctor Who, and that he could see where some of the roots of earlyDoctor Whocame from.[39]

The first visual adaptation of the book was a live teleplay broadcast fromAlexandra Palaceon 25 January 1949 by theBBC, which starredRussell Napieras the Time Traveller and Mary Donn as Weena. No recording of this live broadcast was made; the only record of the production is the script and a few black and white still photographs. A reading of the script, however, suggests that this teleplay remained fairly faithful to the book.[40]