The story focuses onPeter, a youngrabbit, and his family. Peter's mother, Mrs. Rabbit, intends to go shopping for the day and allows Peter and her other three children, Peter's sisters: Flopsy, Mopsy, and Cotton-tail to go playing. She tells them they can go anywhere they like, but not to enter thevegetable gardenof an old man named Mr. McGregor, whose wife, Mrs. McGregor, put their father in apieafter he entered and got caught by Mr. McGregor. Peter's three younger sisters obediently stay away from Mr. McGregor's garden, choosing to go down the lane and gatherblackberries, but Peter enters Mr. McGregor's garden in the hopes of eating somevegetables.

Peter eats more than is good for him and goes looking forparsleyto cure his stomach ache. Peter is seen by Mr. McGregor, who chases Peter. Peter gets caught in a net and three friendly sparrows comfort him. Peter manages to escape Mr. McGregor just in time, but loses his blue jacket and shoes while running off. He hides in a greenhouse, ultimately jumping into awatering canfor protection. Unfortunately there is water inside the watering can so Peter gets wet and sneezes, alerting Mr. McGregor. When Mr. McGregor gets tired running after Peter and resumes his work, Peter tries to escape, but is completely lost in the huge garden. Peter tries getting a youngmouseto help him, however she is collecting food for her family and cannot help. Peter also notices acatsitting by a pond. Peter considers asking for directions, but ultimately decides not to, having been warned about cats by his cousin. However, Peter sees that Mr. McGregor is "gone" and it buys him some time to escape to the gate. Peter sees from a distance the gate where he entered the garden and heads for it, despite being noticed and chased by Mr. McGregor again. With difficulty, he wriggles under the gate, and escapes from the garden. His abandoned clothing is used by Mr. McGregor to dress ascarecrow.

After returning home late, a sick Peter is reprimanded by his mother for losing his shoes and his jacket (the second jacket and shoes he has lost in a fortnight). Peter's mother puts him to bed early without supper. To cure his stomach-ache, Mrs. Rabbit gives Peter a teaspoon ofchamomile tea. Flopsy, Mopsy, and Cotton-tail, meanwhile, enjoy a delicious dinner ofmilk,breadandblackberries.

The Tale of Peter Rabbitwas first published in the United Kingdom byFrederick Warne & Co.as a small hardback book in October 1901; Potter created both the text and the illustrations.[2]The first edition had a print run of 250, with monochrome illustrations.[3]The demand was greater and she needed to print 200 more.[4]Warne published the first full-colour edition in 1902.[3]The blocks for the illustrations and text were sent to theprinterEdmund Evansforengraving, and Potter adjusted thepage proofs.[5]The book was soon on sale in shops in London, includingHarrodsdepartment store, accompanied by the world's firstlicensed character, a soft toy of Peter Rabbit.[3]By December 1903 the book had sold 50,000 copies.[6]The book's success prompted Warne to obtain more stories from Potter, starting in 1903 with bothThe Tailor of GloucesterandThe Tale of Squirrel Nutkin.[3]

The book has since been reprinted many times, and after 100 years had never gone out of print.[3][7]Warne did notcopyrightthe book when it was published in the United States;unlicensededitions of the book were produced, the first published byHenry Altemus Companyin 1904.[8]The book has been translated into 36 languages.[9]Over 45 million copies have been sold, making it one of thebest-selling booksin history.[10]

Scholars have identified a variety of themes inThe Tale of Peter Rabbit.[11]Eliza Dresang suggests that the book is "radical" in multiple ways. The first of these is its child-centred size, easy to hold. It is radical, too, in its nonlinear quality, with the images not immediately beside the text they illustrate (and sometimes before that text), and with sentences that often start with the result, and end with the actor, as in "But round the end of a cucumber frame, whom should he meet but Mr. McGregor!" The meaning, too, has more than one layer, not least in the dressed animals, which are at once experienced by the reader as animals and as humans. And the book's start, with the death of Peter Rabbit's father, is a radical innovation for a book for small children.[6]

Katie Mullins describes Peter's rebellious nature, which is seen in the book's first dialogue, when Mrs. Rabbit forbids Peter to go into Mr. McGregor's garden. Mullins comments that the garden is stated to be dangerous, as it is where Peter's father met his death. She cites Maria Nikolajeva and Carole Scott's description of Peter as a "naughty boy who values his independence and whose desire to transgress boundaries far outweighs his mother's warnings or his personal safety".[12][13]

Judith Robertson and colleagues examine the element of ruthlessness in the story. In their view, Peter Rabbit's qualities such as ruthlessness and defiance allow Potter to speak of her own self-knowledge; this serves both as an outlet for a woman in the strictVictorian era, and as a place for her young readers to imagine going to similar extremes.[14]

School Library Journalincluded the book at #19 on their Top 100 Picture Books list in 2012.[15]

Potter asserted her tales would one day be nursery classics, and part of the "longevity of her books comes from strategy", writes Potter biographer Ruth MacDonald.[16]She was the first to exploit the commercial possibilities of her characters and tales; between 1903 and 1905 these included a Peter Rabbit stuffed toy, an unpublished board game, and nursery wallpaper.[17]

The scholar Margaret Mackey writes that Warne was still attempting to prevent other publishers from printingThe Tale of Peter Rabbitin 1993, despite the failure to protect the copyright 90 years earlier. In her view "the battle has clearly been lost", as multiple editions and formats exist in North America, and some "even in Britain" where the book was still protected at that time.[18]Some use both Potter's words and her illustrations, though sometimes too small to read. Warne itself has issued a large-format book,The Complete Adventures of Peter Rabbit, printing several of the original pages "as panels on a larger page". Mackey comments that this at once loses the subtlety of the original's layout andbook design.[18]In 1989, Warne further printedScenes from The Tale of Peter Rabbitwith "five three-dimensional cut-out pictures from the book, tagged with quotations from the story."[18]Among the seemingly-pirated editions, one by Ottenheimer Publishers in 1993 printed only a selection of the illustrations with the text, with larger but fewer pages. In Mackey's view, "this version is simply an example of diminishment and loss", as the rhythm of the original is dislocated.[18]Other editions dispense with Potter's text altogether, using a selection of her illustrations. One such is Warne'sMeet Peter Rabbit, a board book for babies with five pictures inside and one on the front cover, along with Beatrix Potter's name. The text "barely mention[s] Mr. McGregor."[18]

In 1938, shortly after the success ofSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs,Walt Disneybecame interested in making an animated film based onThe Tale of Peter Rabbit. However, in a letter to a friend, Potter wrote that she refused Walt Disney's "scheme to film Peter Rabbit", saying, "I am not very hopeful about the result. They propose to use cartoons; it seems that a succession of figures can be joggled together to give an impression of motion. I don't think the pictures would be satisfactory... I am not troubling myself about it!"[19]

In 1935, the story was loosely adapted in theMerrie Melodiesshort film,Country Boy. It shows some modifications in relation to Beatrix Potter's original story, most notably the Rabbit family surname is changed to "Cottontail" and Peter having two brothers and a sister rather than three sisters. In 1971, Peter Rabbit appeared as a character in theballetfilmThe Tales of Beatrix Potter. In late 1991,HBOaired an animated musical adaptation ofThe Tale of Peter Rabbit, narrated byCarol Burnett,[20]as part of the network'sStorybook Musicalsseries, which was later released to VHS byFamily Home Entertainmentunder HBO licence.[21]In 1992, the tale was adapted to animation again for theBBCanthology series,The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends, along withThe Tale of Benjamin Bunny. In 2006, Peter Rabbit was heavily referenced in a biopic about Beatrix Potter entitledMiss Potter. In December 2012, a new animated children's TV series titledPeter Rabbitpremiered onNickelodeon, with a full series run beginning in February 2013.[22][23]

In February 2018, a live-action/animated feature film titledPeter Rabbit, directed byWill Gluck, was released. Voice roles were played byJames Corden,Daisy Ridley,Margot Robbie, andElizabeth Debicki, and live action roles played byDomhnall Gleeson,Rose Byrne, andSam Neill.[24]A sequelwas released in 2021.[25]