The story begins with the unnamed narrator arriving at the house of his childhood friend, Roderick Usher, having received a letter from him in a distant part of the country, complaining of an illness and asking for his help. As he arrives, the narrator notices a thin crack extending from the roof, down the front of the house and into the adjacenttarn, or lake.

It is revealed that Roderick's sister, Madeline, is also ill and falls intocataleptic, deathlike trances. Roderick and Madeline are the only remaining members of the Usher family.

The narrator is impressed with Roderick's paintings and attempts to cheer him by reading with him and listening to his improvised musical compositions on the guitar. Roderick sings "The Haunted Palace", then tells the narrator that he believes the house he lives in to be alive, and that this sentience arises from the arrangement of the masonry and vegetation surrounding it. Further, Roderick believes that his fate is connected to the family mansion.

Roderick later informs the narrator that Madeline has died. Fearing that her body will beexhumedfor medical study, Roderick insists that she be entombed for two weeks in thefamily tomblocated in the house before being permanently buried. The narrator helps Roderick put Madeline's body in the tomb, whereupon the narrator realizes that Madeline and Roderick are twins. The narrator also notes that Madeline's body has rosy cheeks,which sometimes happens after death. Over the next week, both Roderick and the narrator find themselves increasingly agitated.

A storm begins, and Roderick comes to the narrator's bedroom (which is situated directly above the house'svault) in an almosthysterical state. Throwing the windows open to the storm, Roderick points out that the lake surrounding the house seems to glow in the dark, just as Roderick depicted in his paintings, but there is no lightning or other explainable source of the glow.

The narrator attempts to calm Roderick by reading aloud from amedieval romanceentitledThe Mad Trist, a novel involving aknightnamed Ethelred who breaks into ahermit's dwellingin an attempt to escape an approaching storm, only to find a palace of gold guarded by adragon. Ethelred also finds a shining brass shield hanging on a wall. Upon the shield is inscribed:

Ethelred swings hismaceat the dragon, which dies with a piercing shriek. When he attempts to take the shield from the wall, it falls to the floor with an unnerving clatter.

As the narrator reads of the knight's forcible entry into the dwelling, he and Roderick hear cracking and ripping sounds from somewhere in the house. When the dragon's death cries are described, a real shriek is heard, again within the house. As he relates the shield falling from off the wall, a hollow metallic reverberation can be heard throughout the house. At first, the narrator ignores the noises, but Roderick becomes increasingly hysterical. Roderick eventually declares that he has been hearing these sounds for days, and that they are being made by his sister, who was in factalive when she was entombed.

The bedroom door is then blown open to reveal Madeline, bloodied from her arduous escape from the tomb. In a final fit of rage, she attacks her brother,scaring him to deathas she herself expires. The narrator then runs from the house, and, as he does, he notices a flash of moonlight behind him. He turns back in time to see the Moon shining through the suddenly widened crack in the house. As he watches, the House of Usher splits in two and the fragments sink away into the lake.

In "The Fall of the House of Usher", Poe's unnamednarratoris called to visit the House of Usher by Roderick Usher. As his "best and only friend,"[3]Roderick writes of his illness and asks that the narrator visit him. The narrator is persuaded by Roderick's desperation for companionship. Though sympathetic and helpful, the narrator is continually made to be an outsider, watching the narrative unfold without fully becoming a part of it. The narrator also exists as Roderick's audience as the men have not remained close. Roderick is convinced of his impending demise and the narrator is gradually drawn into this belief after being brought forth to witness the horrors and hauntings of the House of Usher.[4]

From his arrival, the narrator notes the family's isolationist tendencies, as well as the cryptic and special connection between Madeline and Roderick, the final living members of the Usher family. Throughout the tale and her varying states of consciousness, Madeline completely ignores the narrator's presence. After Roderick Usher claims that Madeline has died, the narrator helps Usher entomb Madeline in an underground vault despite noticing Madeline's flushed, lifelike appearance.

During one sleepless night, the narrator reads aloud to Usher as eerie sounds are heard throughout the mansion. He witnesses Madeline's reemergence and the subsequent, simultaneous death of the twins. The narrator is the only character to escape the House of Usher, which he views as it cracks and sinks into the mountain lake.

Roderick Usher is the twin of Madeline Usher and one of the last living members of the Usher family. Roderick writes to the narrator, his boyhood friend, about an ongoing illness.[3]When the narrator arrives, he is startled to see Roderick's eerie and off-putting appearance. He is described by the narrator as having:

Roderick Usher is arecluse.[3]He is unwell both physically and mentally. In addition to his constant fear and trepidation, Madeline's catalepsy contributes to his decay as he is tormented by the sorrow of watching his sibling die. The narrator states:

According to Terry W. Thompson, Roderick meticulously plans for Madeline's burial to prevent "resurrection men" from stealing his beloved sister's corpse fordissection, study, or experimentation as wascommon in the 18th and 19th centuriesfor medical schools and physicians in need of cadavers.[6]

Roderick and Madeline aretwinsand the two share an incommunicable connection that critics conclude may be eitherincestuousormetaphysical,[7]as two individuals in an extra-sensory relationship embodying a single entity. To that end, Roderick's deteriorating condition speeds his own torment and eventual death.

Like Madeline, Roderick is connected to the mansion, the titular House of Usher. He believes the mansion is sentient and responsible, in part, for his deteriorating mental health andmelancholy. Despite this admission, Usher remains in the mansion and composes art containing the Usher mansion or similarhaunted mansions. His mental health deteriorates faster as he begins to hear Madeline's attempts to escape the underground vault she was buried in, and he eventually meets hisdeath out of fearin a manner similar to the House of Usher's cracking and sinking.

Madeline Usher is the twin sister of Roderick Usher. She is deathly ill and cataleptic. She appears near the narrator, but never acknowledges his presence. She returns to her bedroom where Roderick claims she has died. The narrator and Roderick place her in a tomb despite her flushed, lively appearance. In the tale's conclusion, Madeline escapes from the tomb and returns to Roderick, scaring him to death.

According to Poe's detective methodology in literature, Madeline Usher may be the physical embodiment of the supernatural and metaphysical worlds.[citation needed]Her limited presence is explained as a personification of Roderick's torment and fear.[citation needed]Madeline does not appear until she is summoned through her brother's fear, foreshadowed in the epigraph, with a quote from French poetPierre-Jean de Béranger: "Son cœur est un luth suspendu; / Sitôt qu'on le touche il résonne", meaning "His heart is a suspendedlute; as soon as one touches it, it resonates".[citation needed]

"The Fall of the House of Usher" was first published in September 1839 inBurton's Gentleman's Magazine. It was revised slightly in 1840 for the collectionTales of the Grotesque and Arabesque. It contains Poe's poem "The Haunted Palace", which earlier was published separately in the April 1839 issue ofBaltimore Museum.[8]

In 1928, Éditions Narcisse, predecessor to theBlack Sun Press, published a limited edition of 300 numbered copies with illustrations byAlastair.[citation needed]

Poe's inspiration for the story may be based upon events of the Hezekiah Usher House, which was located on the Usher estate that is now a three-block area in downtown modernBoston, Massachusetts.[9]Adjacent toBoston Commonand bounded by Tremont Street to the northwest, Washington Street to the southeast, Avery Street to the south and Winter Street to the north, the house was constructed in 1684 and either torn down or relocated in 1830.[9]Other sources indicate that a sailor and the young wife of the older owner were caught and entombed in their trysting spot by her husband. When the Usher House was torn down in 1830, two bodies were found embraced in a cavity in the cellar.[10]

Another source of inspiration may be from an actual couple, Mr. and Mrs. Luke Usher, the friends and acting colleagues of his motherEliza Poe.[11]The couple took care of Eliza's three children (including Poe) during her time of illness and eventual death.[citation needed]

German writerE.T.A. Hoffmann, who was a role model and inspiration for Poe, published the story "Das Majorat" in 1819.[citation needed]There are many similarities between the two stories, including the physical breaking of a house, eerie sounds in the night, thestory within a storyand the house owner being called Roderich or Roderick. Because Poe was familiar with Hoffmann's works, he knew the story and drew from it using the elements for his own purposes.[12]

Another German author,Heinrich Clauren's, 1812 story "Das Raubschloß", as translated into English byJoseph Hardmanand published inBlackwood's Magazinein 1828 as "The Robber's Tower", may have served as an inspiration, according toArno Schmidtand Thomas Hansen.[13]As well as its sharing common elements, such as a young woman with a fear of premature burial interred in asepulcherdirectly beneath the protagonist's chamber, stringed instruments, and the living twin of the buried girl, Diane Hoeveler identifies textual evidence of Poe's use of the story, and concludes that the inclusion ofVigiliae Mortuorum secundum Chorum Ecclesiae Maguntinae(Vigils for the Dead according to the Use of the Church of Mainz) is drawn from the use of a similarly obscure book in "The Robber's Tower".[2][14]

The theme of the crumbling, haunted castle is a key feature ofHorace Walpole'sCastle of Otranto(1764), which largely contributed in defining theGothic genre.[15]

"The Fall of the House of Usher" is considered the best example of Poe's "totality", wherein every element and detail is related and relevant.[16]

The presence of a capacious, disintegrating house symbolizing the destruction of the human body continues to be a characteristic element in Poe's later work.[15]

"The Fall of the House of Usher" shows Poe's ability to create an emotional tone in his work, specifically emphasizing feelings offear, impending doom, andguilt.[17]These emotions center on Roderick Usher, who, like many Poe characters, suffers from an unnamed disease. Like the narrator in "The Tell-Tale Heart", this disease inflames Roderick'shyperactive senses. The illness manifests physically but is based in Roderick's mental or even moral state. He is sick, it is suggested, because he expects to be sick based on his family's history of illness and is, therefore, essentially ahypochondriac.[18]Similarly, he buries his sister alive because he expects to bury her alive, creating his ownself-fulfilling prophecy.[citation needed]

The House of Usher, itself doubly referring both to the actual structure and the family, plays a significant role in the story. It is the first "character" that the narrator introduces to the reader, presented with a humanized description: Its windows are described as "eye-like" twice in the first paragraph. The fissure that develops in its side is symbolic of the decay of the Usher family and the house "dies" along with the two Usher siblings. This connection was emphasized in Roderick's poem "The Haunted Palace", which seems to be a direct reference to the house that foreshadows doom.[19]

L. Sprague de Campin hisLovecraft: A Biographywrote that "[a]ccording to the late [Poe expert]Thomas O. Mabbott,H.P. Lovecraft, in 'Supernatural Horror', solved a problem in the interpretation of Poe" by arguing that "Roderick Usher, his sister Madeline, and the house all shared one common soul".[20]

The plot of this tale has prompted many critics to analyze it as a description of the human psyche, comparing, for instance, the House to the unconscious, and its central crack to asplit personality.[citation needed]An incestuous relationship between Roderick and Madeline never is explicitly stated, but may be implied by the attachment between the two siblings.[21]

Opium, which Poe mentions several times in both his prose and poems, is mentioned twice in the tale.[1]The gloomy sensation occasioned by the dreary landscape around the Usher mansion is compared by the narrator to the sickness caused by thewithdrawalsymptoms of an opiate-addict. The narrator also describes Roderick Usher's appearance as that of an "irreclaimable eater of opium."[22]

While there are no direct statements supporting their conclusions, scholars have demonstrated the language deployed by Roderick to describe his sister as full of hints of the possible incestuous relationship between the twins. They argue that this perversion is the actual cause of the fall of the house as well as an end to the lineage of Ushers.[23]

Usher's library is mentioned to have "formed no small portion of the mental existence of the invalid [Roderick Usher]". A list of titles is provided in the story, all of which are allusions to real-world works. Several notable examples include:

Along with "The Tell-Tale Heart", "The Black Cat", and "The Cask of Amontillado", "The Fall of the House of Usher" is considered among Poe's more famous works of prose.[27]As G.R. Thomson writes in his introduction toGreat Short Works of Edgar Allan Poe, "the tale has long been hailed as a masterpiece of Gothic horror; it is also a masterpiece of dramatic irony and structural symbolism".[28]

"The Fall of the House of Usher" has been criticized for being too formulaic, particularly in how Poe followed patterns established in his own works like "Morella" and "Ligeia", using stock characters in stock scenes and stock situations. Repetitive themes like an unidentifiable disease, madness, and resurrection are also criticized.[29]Washington Irvingexplained to Poe in a letter dated November 6, 1839: "You have been too anxious to present your pictures vividly to the eye, or too distrustful of your effect, and had laid on too much colouring. It is erring on the best side – the side of luxuriance".[30]

John McAleer maintained thatHerman Melville's idea for "objectifyingAhab's flawed character" inMoby-Dickcame from the "evocative force" of Poe's "The Fall of the House of Usher". In both Ahab and the house of Usher, the appearance of fundamental soundness is visibly flawed – by Ahab's livid scar, and by the fissure in the masonry of Usher.[31]