Dorothy Galeis a young girl who lives with herAunt Em,Uncle Henry, and dog,Toto, on a farm on theKansasprairie. One day, Dorothy and Toto are caught up in a "cyclone" (more accurately atornado) that deposits them and the farmhouse intoMunchkin Countryin the magicalLand of Oz. The falling house has killed theWicked Witch of the East, the evil ruler of theMunchkins. TheGood Witch of the Northarrives with three grateful Munchkins and gives Dorothy the magicalsilver shoesthat originally belonged to the Wicked Witch. The Good Witch tells Dorothy that the only way she can return home to Kansas is to follow theyellow brick roadto theEmerald Cityand ask the great and powerfulWizard of Ozto help her. As Dorothy embarks on her journey, the Good Witch of the North kisses her on the forehead, giving her magical protection from harm.

On her way down the yellow brick road, Dorothy attends a banquet held by a Munchkin namedBoq. The next day, she frees aScarecrowfrom the pole on which he is hanging, applies oil from a can to the rusted joints of aTin Woodman, and meets aCowardly Lion. The Scarecrow wants a brain, the Tin Woodman wants a heart, and the Lion wants courage, so Dorothy encourages them to journey with her and Toto to the Emerald City to ask for help from the Wizard.

After several adventures, the travelers arrive at the Emerald City and meet theGuardian of the Gates, who asks them to wear green tinted spectacles to keep their eyes from being blinded by the city's brilliance. Each one is called to see the Wizard. He appears to Dorothy as a giant head, to the Scarecrow as a lovely lady, to the Tin Woodman as a terrible beast, and to the Lion as a ball of fire, with the intention of scaring them all. He agrees to help them all if they kill theWicked Witch of the West, who rules overWinkie Country. The Guardian warns them that no one has ever managed to defeat the Witch of the West.

The Wicked Witch of the West sees the travelers approaching with her one telescopic eye. She sends a pack of wolves to tear them to pieces, but the Tin Woodman kills them with his axe. She sends a flock of wild crows to peck their eyes out, but the Scarecrow kills them by twisting their necks. She summons a swarm of black bees to sting them, but they are killed while trying to sting the Tin Woodman while the Scarecrow's straw hides the others. She sends a dozen of her Winkie slaves to attack them, but the Lion stands firm to repel them. Finally, she uses the power of her Golden Cap to send theWinged Monkeysto capture Dorothy, Toto, and the Lion. She cages the Lion, scatters the straw of the Scarecrow, and dents the Tin Woodman. Dorothy is forced to become the witch's personal slave, while the Witch schemes to steal her silver shoes' powerful magic.

The witch successfully tricks Dorothy out of one of her silver shoes. Angered, she throws a bucket of water at the witch and is shocked to see her melt away. The Winkies rejoice at being freed from her tyranny and help restuff the Scarecrow and mend the Tin Woodman. They ask the Tin Woodman to become their ruler, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Dorothy finds the witch's Golden Cap and summons the Winged Monkeys to carry her and her friends back to the Emerald City. The King of the Winged Monkeys tells how he and his band are bound by an enchantment to the cap by the sorceressGayelettefrom the North, and that Dorothy may use it to summon them two more times.

When Dorothy and her friends meet the Wizard again, Toto tips over a screen in a corner of the throne room that reveals "the Wizard", who sadly explains he is a humbug—an ordinary old man who, by a hot air balloon, came to Oz long ago fromOmaha. He provides the Scarecrow with a head full of bran, pins, and needles ("a lot of bran-new brains"), the Tin Woodman with a silk heart stuffed with sawdust, and the Lion a potion of "courage". Their faith in his power gives these items a focus for their desires. He decides to take Dorothy and Toto home and then go back to Omaha in his balloon. At the send-off, he appoints the Scarecrow to rule in his stead, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Toto chases a kitten in the crowd and Dorothy goes after him, but the ropes holding the balloon break and the Wizard floats away.

Dorothy summons the Winged Monkeys and tells them to carry her and Toto home, but they explain they cannot cross the desert surrounding Oz. TheSoldier with the Green Whiskersinforms Dorothy thatGlinda, the Good Witch of the Southmay be able to help her return home, so the travelers begin their journey to see Glinda's castle inQuadling Country. On the way, the Lion kills a giant spider who is terrorizing the animals in a forest. They ask him to become their king, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Dorothy summons the Winged Monkeys a third time to fly them over a hill to Glinda's castle.

Glinda greets them and reveals that Dorothy's silver shoes can take her anywhere she wishes to go. She embraces her friends, all of whom will be returned to their new kingdoms through Glinda's three uses of the Golden Cap: the Scarecrow to the Emerald City, the Tin Woodman to Winkie Country, and the Lion to the forest; after which the cap will be given to the King of the Winged Monkeys, freeing him and his band. Dorothy takes Toto in her arms, knocks her heels together three times, and wishes to return home. Instantly, she begins whirling through the air and rolling on the grass of the Kansas prairie, up to the farmhouse, though the silver shoes fall off her feet en route and are lost in theDeadly Desert. She runs to Aunt Em, saying "I'm so glad to be home again!"

The book was illustrated by Baum's friend and collaboratorW. W. Denslow, who also co-held the copyright. The design was lavish for the time, with illustrations on many pages, backgrounds in different colors, and several color plate illustrations.[12]The typeface featured the newly designedMonotype Old Style. In September 1900, TheGrand Rapids Heraldwrote that Denslow's illustrations are "quite as much of the story as in the writing". The editorial opined that had it not been for Denslow's pictures, the readers would be unable to picture precisely the figures of Dorothy, Toto, and the other characters.[13]

Denslow's illustrations were so well known that merchants of many products obtained permission to use them to promote their wares. The forms of the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, the Cowardly Lion, the Wizard, and Dorothy were made into rubber and metal sculptures. Costume jewelry, mechanical toys, and soap were also designed using their figures.[14]The distinctive look of Denslow's illustrations led to imitators at the time, most notably Eva Katherine Gibson'sZauberlinda, the Wise Witch, which mimicked both the typography and the illustration design ofOz.[15]

A new edition of the book appeared in 1944, with illustrations by Evelyn Copelman.[16][17]Although it was claimed that the new illustrations were based on Denslow's originals, they more closely resemble the characters as seen in the famous1939 film versionof Baum's book.[18]

According to Baum's son,Harry Neal, the author had often told his children "whimsical stories before they became material for his books".[19]Harry Baum called his father the "swellest man I knew", a man who was able to give a decent reason as to whyblack birds cooked in a piecould afterwards get out and sing.[19]

Many of the characters, props, and ideas in the novel were drawn from Baum's personal life and experiences.[20]Baum held different jobs, moved a lot, and was exposed to many people, so the inspiration for the story could have been taken from many different aspects of his life.[20]In the introduction to the story, Baum writes that "it aspires to being a modernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are retained and the heart-aches and nightmares are left out".[21]

As a child, Baum frequently had nightmares of a scarecrow pursuing him across a field.[22]Moments before the scarecrow's "ragged hay fingers" nearly gripped his neck, it would fall apart before his eyes. Decades later, as an adult, Baum integrated his tormentor into the novel as the Scarecrow.[23]In the early 1880s, Baum's playMatcheswas being performed when a "flicker from a kerosene lantern sparked the rafters", causing the Baum opera house to be consumed by flames. Scholar Evan I. Schwartz suggested that this might have inspired the Scarecrow's severest terror: "There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of. A lighted match."[24]

According to Baum's son Harry, the Tin Woodman was born from Baum's attraction to window displays. He wished to make something captivating for the window displays, so he used an eclectic assortment of scraps to craft a striking figure. From a wash-boiler he made a body, from bolted stovepipes he made arms and legs, and from the bottom of a saucepan he made a face. Baum then placed a funnel hat on the figure, which ultimately became the Tin Woodman.[25]

Baum's wifeMaud Gagefrequently visited their newborn niece, Dorothy Louise Gage, whom she adored as the daughter she never had. The infant became gravely sick and died at the age of five months inBloomington, Illinois, on November 11, 1898, from "congestion of the brain". Maud was devastated.[26]To assuage her distress, Baum made his protagonist ofThe Wonderful Wizard of Oza girl named Dorothy, and he dedicated the book to his wife.[27]The baby was buried atEvergreen Cemetery, where her gravestone has a statue of the character Dorothy placed next to it.[28]Baum's mother-in-law, activistMatilda Joslyn Gage, has also been cited as one of the inspirations for Dorothy.[29]

Decades later,Jocelyn Burdick—the daughter of Baum's other niece, Magdalena Carpenter, and a formerDemocraticU.S. SenatorfromNorth Dakota—asserted that her mother also partly inspired the character of Dorothy.[30]Burdick claimed that her great-uncle spent "considerable time at the Сarpenter homestead ... and became very attached to Magdalena".[30]Burdick has reported many similarities between her mother's homestead and the farm of Aunt Em and Uncle Henry.[30]

Uncle Henrywas modeled after Henry Gage, Baum's father-in-law. Bossed around by his wifeMatilda, Henry rarely dissented with her. He flourished in business, though, and his neighbors looked up to him. Likewise, Uncle Henry was a "passive but hard-working man" who "looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke".[31]

The witches in the novel were influenced bywitch-huntingresearch gathered by Matilda Joslyn Gage. The stories of barbarous acts against accused witches scared Baum. Two key events in the novel involve wicked witches who meet their death through metaphorical means.[32]Baum's biographers have also drawn correlations between Baum'sGood Witchand Gage's feminist writings.[29]

In 1890, Baum lived inAberdeen, South Dakotaduring a drought, and he wrote a story in his "Our Landlady" column in Aberdeen'sThe Saturday Pioneerabout a farmer who gave green goggles to his horses, causing them to believe that the wood chips that they were eating were pieces of grass.[33]Similarly, the Wizard made the people in the Emerald City wear green goggles so that they would believe that their city was built from emeralds.[34]

During Baum's short stay in Aberdeen, the dissemination of myths about the West continued. However, the West, instead of being a wonderland, turned into a wasteland because of a drought and a depression. In 1891, Baum moved his family from South Dakota to Chicago. At that time, Chicago was getting ready for theWorld's Columbian Expositionin 1893. Scholar Laura Barrett stated that Chicago was "considerably more akin to Oz than to Kansas". After discovering that the myths about the West's incalculable riches were baseless, Baum created "an extension of the American frontier in Oz". In many respects, Baum's creation is similar to the actual frontier save for the fact that the West was still undeveloped at the time. The Munchkins Dorothy encounters at the beginning of the novel represent farmers, as do the Winkies she later meets.[35]

Local legend has it that Oz, also known as the Emerald City, was inspired by a prominent castle-like building in the community of Castle Park nearHolland, Michigan, where Baum lived during the summer. The yellow brick road was derived from a road at that time paved by yellow bricks, located inPeekskill, New York, where Baum attended thePeekskill Military Academy. Baum scholars often refer to the 1893 Chicago World's Fair (the "White City") as an inspiration for the Emerald City. Other legends suggest that the inspiration came from theHotel Del Coronadonear San Diego, California. Baum was a frequent guest at the hotel and had written several of the Oz books there.[36]In a 1903 interview withThe Publishers' Weekly,[37]Baum said that the name "Oz" came from his file cabinet labeled "O–Z".[38][22]

Some critics have suggested that Baum's Oz may have been inspired by Australia. Australia is often colloquially spelled or referred to as "Oz". Furthermore, inOzma of Oz(1907), Dorothy gets back to Oz as the result of a storm at sea while she and Uncle Henry are traveling by ship to Australia. Like Australia, Oz is an island continent somewhere to the west of California with inhabited regions bordering on a great desert. Baum perhaps intended Oz to be Australia or a magical land in the center of the great Australian desert.[39]

In addition to being influenced by the fairy-tales of theBrothers GrimmandHans Christian Andersen,[40]Baum was significantly influenced by English writerLewis Carroll's 1865 novelAlice's Adventures in Wonderland.[41]Although Baum found the plot of Carroll's novel to be incoherent, he identified the book's source of popularity asAliceherself—a child with whom younger readers could identify, and this influenced Baum's choice of Dorothy as his protagonist.[40]

Although influenced by Carroll's distinctly English work, Baum nonetheless sought to create a story that had recognizable American elements, such as farming and industrialization.[42]Consequently, Baum combined the conventional features of afairy talesuch aswitchesandwizardswith well-known fixtures in his young readers' Midwestern lives such asscarecrowsandcornfields.[43]

The original illustrator of the novel,W. W. Denslow, aided in the development of Baum's story and greatly influenced the way it has been interpreted.[22]Baum and Denslow had a close working relationship and worked together to create the presentation of the story through the images and the text.[22]Color is an important element of the story and is present throughout the images, with each chapter having a different color representation. Denslow also added characteristics to his drawings that Baum never described. For example, Denslow drew a house and the gates of the Emerald City with faces on them.

In the laterOzbooks,John R. Neill, who illustrated all the sequels, continued to use elements from Denslow's earlier illustrations, including faces on the Emerald City's gates.[44]Another aspect is the Tin Woodman's funnel hat, which is not mentioned in the text until later books but appears in most artists' interpretation of the character, including the stage and film productions of 1902–1909, 1908, 1910, 1914, 1925, 1931, 1933, 1939, 1982, 1985, 1988, 1992, and others. One of the earliest illustrators not to include a funnel hat was Russell H. Schulz in the 1957Whitman Publishingedition—Schulz depicted him wearing a pot on his head. Libico Maraja's illustrations, which first appeared in a 1957 Italian edition and have also appeared in English-language and other editions, are well known for depicting him bareheaded.

The Wonderful Wizard of Ozreceived positive critical reviews upon release. In a September 1900 review,The New York Timespraised the novel, writing that it would appeal to child readers and to younger children who could not read yet. The review also praised the illustrations for being a pleasant complement to the text.[45]

During the subsequent decades after the novel's publication in 1900, it received little critical analysis from scholars of children's literature. Lists of suggested reading published for juvenile readers never contained Baum's work,[46]and his works were rarely assigned in classrooms.[47]This lack of interest stemmed from the scholars' misgivings about fantasy, as well as to their belief that lengthy series had little literary merit.[46]

It frequently came under fire in later decades. In 1957, the director of Detroit's libraries bannedThe Wonderful Wizard of Ozfor having "no value" for children of today, for supporting "negativism", and for bringing children's minds to a "cowardly level". ProfessorRussel B. NyeofMichigan State Universitycountered that "if the message of the Oz books—love, kindness, and unselfishness make the world a better place—seems of no value today", then maybe the time is ripe for "reassess[ing] a good many other things besides the Detroit library's approved list of children's books".[48]

In 1986, sevenFundamentalist Christianfamilies in Tennessee opposed the novel's inclusion in the public school syllabus and filed a lawsuit.[49]They based their opposition to the novel on its depicting benevolent witches and promoting the belief that integral human attributes were "individually developed rather than God-given".[49]One parent said: "I do not want my children seduced into godless supernaturalism."[50]Other reasons included the novel's teaching that females are equal to males and that animals are personified and can speak. The judge ruled that when the novel was being discussed in class, the parents were allowed to have their children leave the classroom.[51]

In April 2000, theLibrary of CongressdeclaredThe Wonderful Wizard of Ozto be "America's greatest and best-loved homegrown fairytale", also naming it the first American fantasy for children and one of the most-read children's books.[7]Leonard Everett Fisher ofThe Horn Book Magazinewrote in 2000 thatOzhas "a timeless message from a less complex era, and it continues to resonate". The challenge of valuing oneself during impending adversity has not, Fisher noted, lessened during the prior 100 years.[52]Two years later, in a 2002 review, Bill Delaney ofSalem Presspraised Baum for giving children the opportunity to discover magic in the mundane things in their everyday lives. He further commended Baum for teaching "millions of children to love reading during their crucial formative years".[43]In 2012 it was ranked number 41 on a list of the top 100 children's novels published bySchool Library Journal.[53]

After George M. Hill's bankruptcy in 1902, copyright in the book passed to theBowen-Merrill CompanyofIndianapolis, which published most of Baum's other books from 1901 to 1903, both reprints (Father Goose, His Book,The Magical Monarch of Mo,American Fairy Tales,Dot and Tot of Merryland) and new works (The Master Key,The Army Alphabet,The Navy Alphabet,The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus,The Enchanted Island of Yew,The Songs of Father Goose). Bowen-Merrill's 1903 edition initially had the titleThe New Wizard of Oz, to distinguish it fromthe 1902 musical, which was by then better known than the original book and had a very different story.[54]The word "New" was quickly dropped in subsequent printings, leaving the now-familiar shortened title,The Wizard of Oz, and some minor textual changes were added, such as to "yellow daises", and changing a chapter title from "The Rescue" to "How the Four Were Reunited". The editions they published lacked most of the in-text color and color plates of the original. Many cost-cutting measures were implemented, including removal of some of the color printing without replacing it with black, printing nothing rather than the beard of theSoldier with the Green Whiskers.

When Baum filed for bankruptcy after his critically and popularly successful film and stage productionThe Fairylogue and Radio-Playsfailed to make back its production costs, Baum lost the rights to all of the books published by what was now called Bobbs-Merrill, and they were licensed to the M. A. Donahue Company, which printed them in significantly cheaper "blotting paper" editions with advertising that directly competed with Baum's more recent books, published by theReilly & BrittonCompany, from which he was making his living, explicitly hurting sales ofThe Patchwork Girl of Oz, the new Oz book for 1913, to boost sales ofWizard, which Donahue called in a full-page ad inThe Publishers' Weekly(June 28, 1913), Baum's "one pre-eminently great Juvenile Book". In a letter to Baum dated December 31, 1914, F. K. Reilly lamented that the averagebuyeremployed by a retail store would not understand why he should be expected to spend 75 cents for a copy ofTik-Tok of Ozwhen he could buy a copy ofWizardfor between 33 and 36 cents. Baum had previously written a letter complaining about the Donahue deal, which he did not know about until it was fait accompli, and one of the investors who heldThe Wizard of Ozrights had inquired why the royalty was only five or six cents per copy, depending on quantity sold, which made no sense to Baum.[55]

A new edition from Bobbs-Merrill in 1949 illustrated by Evelyn Copelman, again titledThe New Wizard of Oz, paid lip service to Denslow but was based strongly, apart from the Lion, on the MGM movie. Copelman had illustrated a new edition ofThe Magical Monarch of Motwo years earlier.[56]

It was not until the book entered the public domain in 1956 that new editions, either with the original color plates, or new illustrations, proliferated.[57]A revised version of Copelman's artwork was published in aGrosset & Dunlapedition, and Reilly & Lee (formerly Reilly & Britton) published an edition in line with the Oz sequels, which had previously treatedThe Marvelous Land of Ozas the first Oz book,[58]not having the publication rights toWizard, with new illustrations by Dale Ulrey.[17]Ulrey had previously illustratedJack Snow'sJaglon and the Tiger-Faries, an expansion of a Baum short story "The Story of Jaglon", and a 1955 edition ofThe Tin Woodman of Oz, though both sold poorly. Later Reilly & Lee editions used Denslow's original illustrations.

Notable more recent editions are the 1986 Pennyroyal edition illustrated byBarry Moser, which was reprinted by theUniversity of California Press, and the 2000The Annotated Wizard of Ozedited byMichael Patrick Hearn(heavily revised from a 1972 edition that was printed in a wide format that allowed for it to be a facsimile of the original edition with notes and additional illustrations at the sides), which was published byW. W. Nortonand included all the original color illustrations, as well as supplemental artwork byDenslow. Other centennial editions includedUniversity Press of Kansas'sKansas Centennial Edition, illustrated byMichael McCurdywith black-and-white illustrations, andRobert Sabuda'spop-up book.