Tom Canty, the youngest child of a very poor family living in Offal Court, located inLondon,England, has been abused by his father and grandmother but is encouraged by the localpriest, who taught him to read and write. Loitering around thePalace of Westminstergates one day, Tom seesEdward Tudor, thePrince of Wales. Coming too close in his intense excitement, he is caught and nearly beaten by the royal guards. However, Edward stops them and invites Tom into his palace chamber. There, the two boys get to know one another and are fascinated by each other's lives. They have an uncanny resemblance to each other and learn they were even born on the same day, so they decide to swap clothes "temporarily". Edward hides an item, which the reader later learns is theGreat Seal of England, and goes outside to confront the guards who abused Tom; however, dressed as Tom, he is not recognized by the guards, who drive him from the palace.

Tom, dressed as Edward, tries to cope with court customs and manners after being mistaken for the prince. Edward's father,King Henry VIII, his fellow nobles, and the palace staff think the prince has an illness that has causedmemory lossand fear he will gomad. After King Henry dies, Tom is repeatedly asked about the missing Great Seal of England, but he knows nothing about it. However, when Tom is asked to sit in on judgments, his common-sense observations reassure them that his mind is sound.

Edward eventually finds his way through the streets to the Canty home, where the Canty family believes him to be Tom. There, he is subjected to the brutality of Tom'salcoholicfather, from whom he manages to escape, and meets Miles Hendon, a soldier and nobleman returning from war. Although Miles does not believe Edward's claims to royalty, he humors him and becomes his protector. Meanwhile, news reaches them that King Henry has died and Edward has become king.

As Edward experiences the brutal life of a London pauper firsthand, he becomes aware of the stark class inequality in England. In particular, he sees the harsh, punitive nature of the English judicial system, under which people are burned at the stake, pilloried, and flogged. He realizes that the accused are convicted on flimsy evidence and branded or hanged for petty offenses, and he vows to reign with mercy when he regains his rightful place. When Edward declares to a gang of thieves that he is the king and will put an end to unjust laws, they assume he is insane and hold a mockcoronation.

After a series of adventures, including a stint in prison, Edward interrupts thecoronationas Tom is about to be crowned king. The nobles are shocked at their resemblance but refuse to believe that Edward is the rightful king wearing Tom's clothes until he produces the Great Seal of England that he hid before leaving the palace. Edward and Tom switch back to their original places, and Edward is crowned King Edward VI of England. Miles is rewarded with the rank ofEarland the family right to sit in the king's presence. In gratitude for supporting the new king's claim to the throne, Edward names Tom the "King's Ward", a privileged position he holds for the rest of his life. The novel ends stating that Tom lived a long life, although it would have been unlikely for both of them to survive the reign ofMary I, while Edward died at the age of 15.

The introductory quote—"The quality of mercy is . . . twice blest; / It blesseth him that gives and him that takes: / 'Tis mightiest in the mightiest: it becomes / The throned monarch better than his crown"—is part of the "quality of mercy" speech fromShakespeare'sThe Merchant of Venice.

While written for children,The Prince and the Pauperis both a critique of social inequality and a criticism of judging others by their appearance. Twain wrote of the book, "My idea is to afford a realizing sense of the exceeding severity of the laws of that day by inflicting some of their penalties upon the King himself and allowing him a chance to see the rest of them applied to others..."[2]

Having returned from a secondEuropean tour—which formed the basis ofA Tramp Abroad(1880)—Twain read extensively about English and French history. Initially intended as a play, the book was originally set inVictorian Englandbefore Twain decided to set it further back in time.[3]He wroteThe Prince and the Pauperhaving already startedAdventures of Huckleberry Finn.

The "whipping-boy story", originally meant as a chapter to be part ofThe Prince and the Pauper, was published in theHartfordBazar Budgetof July 4, 1880, before Twain deleted it from the novel at the suggestion ofWilliam Dean Howells.[why?]

Ultimately,The Prince and the Pauperwas published by subscription by James R. Osgood of Boston, with illustrations by Frank Thayer Merrill, John Harley andLudvig Sandöe Ipsen.[4]

The book bears a dedication to Twain's daughters, Susie and Clara Clemens, and is subtitled "A Tale For Young People of All Ages".[3]