The play is set in "The Present" (1895 at the time of the premiere).[1]

Algernon Moncrieff's flat inHalf Moon Street

Algernon Moncrieff, a youngman about town, is visited by a friend whom he knows by the name of Ernest Worthing. The latter has come from the country to propose to Algernon's cousin, Gwendolen Fairfax. Algernon refuses to consent until Ernest explains why his cigarette case bears the inscription, "From little Cecily, with her fondest love to her dear Uncle Jack". Worthing is forced to admit to living a double life. In the country, he assumes a serious attitude for the benefit of his youngward, theheiressCecily Cardew, and goes by the name of John or Jack, while pretending that he must worry about a wastrel younger brother in London, named Ernest. Meanwhile, he assumes the identity of the profligate Ernest when in town. Algernon confesses a similar deception: he pretends to have a sickly friend named Bunbury in the country, whom he can "visit" whenever he wishes to avoid an unwelcome social obligation. Jack refuses to tell Algernon the location of his country estate.[2]

Gwendolen and her formidable mother, Lady Bracknell, now call on Algernon, who distracts Lady Bracknell in another room while Jack proposes to Gwendolen. She accepts but says she could not love him if his name were not Ernest. He resolves secretly to be rechristened. Discovering the two in this intimate exchange, Lady Bracknell interviews Jack as a prospective suitor for her daughter. Horrified to learn that he was adopted – having been found as a baby in a handbag deposited atVictoria Stationin London – she refuses him and forbids further contact with her daughter. Gwendolen manages to covertly promise to him her undying love. As Jack gives her his address in the country, Algernon surreptitiously notes it on the cuff of his sleeve: Jack's revelation of his pretty young ward has motivated his friend to meet her.[3]

The Garden of the Manor House, Woolton

Cecily is studying with her governess, Miss Prism, in the (fictitious) village of Woolton, Hertfordshire. Algernon arrives, pretending to be Ernest Worthing, and soon charms Cecily. Long fascinated by her uncle Jack's hitherto-absent dissolute brother, she is predisposed to fall for Algernon in his role of Ernest. Algernon plans for therector, Dr Chasuble, to rechristen him "Ernest". Jack has decided to abandon his double life. He arrives in full mourning and announces his brother's death in Paris, from a severe chill, a story undermined by Algernon's presence in the guise of Ernest. Gwendolen now enters, having left the Bracknells' London house without her mother's knowledge. During the temporary absence of the two men she meets Cecily. They get along well at first, but when they learn of the other's engagement each indignantly declares that she is the one engaged to Ernest. When Jack and Algernon reappear together, Gwendolen and Cecily realise they have been deceived; they leave the men in the garden and withdraw to the house.[4]

Morning-room at the Manor House, Woolton

Gwendolen and Cecily forgive the men's trickery. Arriving in pursuit of her daughter, Lady Bracknell is astonished to be told that Algernon and Cecily are engaged. The revelation of Cecily's wealth soon dispels Lady Bracknell's initial doubts over the young lady's suitability, but any engagement is forbidden by herguardian, Jack: he will consent only if Lady Bracknell agrees to his own union with Gwendolen – something she declines to do.

The impasse is resolved by the return of Miss Prism, whom Lady Bracknell recognises as the person who, 28 years earlier as a family nursemaid, had taken a baby boy out in aperambulatorfrom Lord Bracknell's house and never returned. Challenged, Miss Prism explains that she had absent-mindedly put into the perambulator the manuscript of a novel she was writing, and put the baby in a handbag, which she later left at Victoria Station. Jack produces the same handbag, showing that he is the lost baby, the eldest son of Lady Bracknell's late sister, Mrs Moncrieff, and thus Algernon's elder brother. Having acquired such respectable relations, he is acceptable as Gwendolen's suitor.[5]

Gwendolen continues to insist that she can love only a man named Ernest. Lady Bracknell tells Jack that, as the firstborn, he would have been named after his father, General Moncrieff. Jack examines theArmy Listsand discovers that his father's name – and hence his own original christening name – was, in fact, Ernest. As the happy couples embrace – Ernest and Gwendolen, Algernon and Cecily, and even Dr Chasuble and Miss Prism – Lady Bracknell complains to her newfound relative: "My nephew, you seem to be displaying signs of triviality". He replies, "On the contrary, Aunt Augusta: I've now realized for the first time in my life the vital Importance of Being Earnest".[6]

The Importance of Being Earnestfollowed the success of Wilde's earlierdrawing room plays,Lady Windermere's Fan(1892),A Woman of No Importance(1893)  andAn Ideal Husband(1895).[7]He spent the summer of 1894 with his family atWorthing, on theSussexcoast, where he began work on the new play.[8]

Wilde scholars generally agree that the most important influence on the play wasW. S. Gilbert's 1877farceEngaged,[9]from which Wilde borrowed not only several incidents but also, in the words of Russell Jackson in his 1980 introduction to Wilde's play, "the gravity of tone demanded by Gilbert of his actors".[10]Wilde's first draft was so long that it filled fourexercise books, and over the summer he continually revised and refined it, as he had done with his earlier plays.[11][12]Among his many changes he altered the subtitle from "a Serious Comedy for Trivial People" to "a Trivial Comedy for Serious People",[13]and renamed the characters Lady Brancaster and Algernon Montford as Lady Bracknell and Algernon Moncrieff.[14]

Wilde wrote the part of John Worthing with the actor-managerCharles Wyndhamin mind. Wilde sharedBernard Shaw'sview that Wyndham was the ideal comedy actor and based the character on his stage persona.[7]Wyndham accepted the play for production athis theatre, but before rehearsals began, he changed his plans in order to help a beleaguered colleague, the actor-managerGeorge Alexanderof theSt James's Theatre. In early 1895 Alexander's production ofHenry James'sGuy Domvillefailed, and closed after 31 performances, leaving Alexander in urgent need of a new play to follow it.[15][16]Wyndham waived his contractual rights and allowed Alexander to stage Wilde's play.[16][17]

After working with Wilde on stage movements, using a model theatre, Alexander asked the author to shorten the play from four acts to three. Wilde complied and combined elements of the second and third acts.[18]The largest cut was the removal of the character of Mr Gribsby, a solicitor who comes from London to serve awriton the profligate "Ernest" Worthing for unpaid dining bills at theSavoy Hotel.[11][19]Wilde was not entirely happy with alterations made at Alexander's behest. He said, "Yes, it is quite a good play. I remember I wrote one very like it myself, but it was even more brilliant than this",[18]but the three-act version usually performed is widely considered more effective than Wilde's four-act original.[20][21][n 1]

The play was first produced at the St James's Theatre, London, on 14 February –Valentine's Day– 1895,[22]preceded by acurtain-raiser, a short comedy calledIn the Season, byLangdon E. Mitchell.[23]During most of the month-long rehearsal period Wilde was on holiday in Algeria with his gay partner,Lord Alfred Douglas, but he returned in time for thedress rehearsalon 12 February.[24]Douglas remained in Algiers; his father, theMarquess of Queensberry, planned to disrupt the premiere by throwing a bouquet of rotten vegetables at the playwright when he took his bow at the end. Wilde learned of the plan and Alexander cancelled Queensberry's ticket and arranged for the police to bar his entrance. Wilde wrote to Douglas, "He arrived with aprize fighter!![n 2]I had allScotland Yardto guard the theatre. He prowled around for three hours, then left chattering like a monstrous ape".[26]Queensberry left the bouquet at the theatre entrance.[25]

Wilde arrived for the premiere dressed in "florid sobriety", wearing agreen carnationin his lapel.[27]Allan Aynesworth, who played Algernon Moncrieff, recalled toHesketh Pearson:

The theatrical newspaperThe Erareported that the play "met with enthusiastic and unanimous approval" and confidently predicted "a long and prosperous run".[23]Aynesworth was "debonair and stylish", and Alexander, who played Jack Worthing, "demure";[29]according toThe Era, "Mr George Alexander played Worthing just as a part of this sort should be played, i.e., with entire seriousness and no indication of purposed irony".[23]The Morning Postsaid thatIrene VanbrughandEvelyn Millardcould not be bettered and caught the required Gilbertian tone.[30]The Observerremarked on the "rapturous amusement" of the audience, and echoedThe Era's prediction of a long run.[31]

According to the published text, the characters, descriptions and cast comprised:[32][1]

Queensberry continued harassing Wilde, who within weeks launched aprivate prosecutionagainst him forcriminal libel, triggering aseries of trialsthat revealed Wilde's homosexual private life and ended in his imprisonment forgross indecencyin May 1895. TheVictorianpublic turned against him after his arrest, and box-office receipts dwindled rapidly;[34][35]Alexander tried to save the production by removing the author's name from the playbills,[n 4]but it closed on 8 May after only 83 performances.[24][37]

The play's originalBroadwayproduction opened at theEmpire Theatreon 22 April 1895 but closed after sixteen performances. Its cast includedWilliam Favershamas Algernon,Henry Milleras Jack,Viola Allenas Gwendolen and Ida Vernon as Lady Bracknell.[38]The Australian premiere was in Melbourne on 10 August 1895, presented byRobert BroughandDion Boucicault Jr., with Cecil Ward as Jack, Boucicault as Algernon and Jenny Watt-Tanner as Lady Bracknell. The production was an immediate success.[39][40]Wilde's downfall in England did not affect the popularity of his plays in Australia.[41][n 5]The same company presented the New Zealand premiere in October 1895, when the play was enthusiastically received. Reviewers said, "in subtlety of thought, brilliancy of wit and sparkling humour, it has scarcely been excelled";[42]and "its fun is irresistible ... increasing in intensity until in the third and last act it becomes uproarious".[43]

In contrast with much theatre of the time, the light plot ofThe Importance of Being Earnestdoes not address serious social and political issues,  and this troubled some contemporary reviewers. Though unsure of Wilde's seriousness as a dramatist, they recognised the play's cleverness, humour and popularity.[44]Shaw found the play "extremely funny" but "heartless", a view he maintained all his life.[45][n 6]His review in theSaturday Reviewargued that comedy should touch as well as amuse: "I go to the theatre to be moved to laughter, not to be tickled or bustled into it".[47]

InThe World,William Archerwrote that he had enjoyed watching the play but found it to be empty of meaning: "What can a poor critic do with a play which raises no principle, whether of art or morals, creates its own canons and conventions, and is nothing but an absolutely wilful expression of an irrepressibly witty personality?"[48]InThe Speaker,A. B. Walkleyadmired the play and was one of few to see it as the culmination of Wilde's dramatic career. He denied that the term "farce" was derogatory or even lacking in seriousness and said, "It is of nonsense all compact, and better nonsense, I think, our stage has not seen".[49]

H. G. Wells, in an unsigned review forThe Pall Mall Gazette, called the play one of the freshest comedies of the year, saying, "More humorous dealing with theatrical conventions it would be difficult to imagine".[50]He also questioned whether people would fully see its message, "... how Serious People will take this Trivial Comedy intended for their learning remains to be seen. No doubt seriously".[50]The play was so light-hearted that some reviewers compared it to comic opera rather than drama.W. H. Audenlater (1963) called it "a pure verbal opera", andThe Timescommented, "The story is almost too preposterous to go without music".[29]Mary McCarthy, inSights and Spectacles(1959), despite thinking the play extremely funny, called it "a ferocious idyll"; "depravity is the hero and the only character".[51]

As Wilde's works came to be read and performed again in the early 20th century, it wasThe Importance of Being Earnestthat received the most productions.[52]The critic and authorMax Beerbohmcalled the play Wilde's "finest, most undeniably his own", saying that the plots of his other comedies –Lady Windermere's Fan,A Woman of No ImportanceandAn Ideal Husband– follow the manner ofVictorien Sardou,[n 7]and are similarly unrelated to the theme of the work, while inThe Importance of Being Earnestthe story is "dissolved" into the form of the play.[54]By the time of its centenary in 1995 the journalistMark Lawsondescribed the piece as "the second most known and quoted play in English afterHamlet".[55]

The Importance of Being Earnestand Wilde's three other drawing room plays were performed in Britain during the author's imprisonment and exile by small touring groups. A. B. Tapping's company touredThe Importancebetween October 1895 and March 1896,[n 8]and Elsie Lanham's touring company presented it along withLady Windermere's Fan, beginning in November 1899.[57]The play was well received; one local critic described it as "sparkling with wit and epigrams",[58]and another called it "a most entertaining comedy [with] some sparkling dialogue".[59]

The play was not seen again in London until after Wilde's death in 1900. Alexander revived it in the small Coronet theatre inNotting Hill, outside the West End, in December the following year,[60]after taking it on tour, starring as John Worthing, with a cast that included the youngLilian Braithwaiteas Cecily.The Manchester Guardiancalled the piece "a brilliant play".[61]The Importance of Being Earnestreturned to the West End when Alexander presented a revival at the St James's in 1902. It was billed as "By the author ofLady Windermere's Fan", and few reviews mentioned Wilde's name, but his work was praised.The Sporting Timessaid: