In 1913, Anthony Patch is a 25-year-oldHarvard Universityalumnus recently having returned fromRomeand now residing in New York City.[18]He is the presumptive heir to his dying grandfather's vast fortune. Through his friend Richard "Dick" Caramel, Anthony meets Gloria Gilbert, a beautifulflapperand "jazz baby" who is Dick's cousin.[3]Anthony begins courting her. The couple fall madly in love, with Gloria ecstatically exclaiming: "Mother says that two souls are sometimes created together—and in love before they're born."[19]After a whirlwind courtship, Anthony and Gloria marry.

For the first three years of their married life together, Anthony and Gloria vow to adhere to "the magnificent attitude of not giving a damn... for what they chose to do and what consequences it brought. Not to be sorry, not to lose one cry of regret, to live according to a clear code of honor toward each other, and to seek the moment's happiness as fervently and persistently as possible."[20]Pitted against each other's selfish attitudes, Gloria and Anthony's marital bliss evaporates. Once the couple's infatuation with each other fades, they begin to see their differences do more harm than good, as well as leaving each other with unfulfilled hopes. Over time, the disappointed couple become hedonistic and cynicallibertines.

When Anthony's grandfather learns of Anthony's dissipation, he disinherits him. DuringWorld War I, Anthony serves in theAmerican Expeditionary Forceswhile Gloria remains home alone until his return. While in army training, Anthony has an extramarital liaison with Dot Raycroft, a lower-class Southern woman.[21]After theAllied Powerssign anarmistice with Imperial Germanyin November 1918, Anthony returns to New York City and reunites with Gloria. When the struggle over the grandfather's inheritance concludes, Anthony wins his inheritance, but he has now become a hopelessalcoholic, and his wife has lost her beauty. The couple is now wealthy but morally and physically ruined.

At the end, Anthony Patch—echoing his grandfather—describes his inherited wealth as a consequence of his character rather than mere circumstance: "Only a few months before people had been urging him to give in, to submit to mediocrity... But he had known that he was justified in his way of life—and he had stuck it out staunchly... 'I showed them... It was a hard fight, but I didn't give up and I came through!"[22]