Amory Blaine, a youngMidwesterner, believes that he has a great destiny, but the precise nature of this destiny eludes him. He attends a preparatory school where he becomes a football quarterback. He grows estranged from his eccentric mother Beatrice Blaine and becomes the protégé of Monsignor Thayer Darcy, a Catholic priest. During his sophomore year at Princeton, he returns to Minneapolis over Christmas break and falls in love withIsabelle Borgé, a wealthy debutante whom he first met as a boy. Amory and Isabelle embark upon a romance.

While at Princeton, Amory deluges Isabelle with letters, but she becomes disenchanted with him due to his criticism, and they break up onLong Island. Following their separation, Amory accompanies a Princeton classmate to an apartment occupied by two New Yorkshowgirlsofeasy virtue. He considers staying the night with the showgirls, but his conscience and an apparition compel him to leave. After four years at Princeton,[30]he enlists in the United States Army amidWorld War I. He ships overseas to serve in themuddy trenchesof theWestern front.[b]While overseas, his mother Beatrice dies, and most of his family's wealth disappears due to a series of failed investments.

After thearmistice with Imperial Germanyin November 1918, Amory settles in New York City amid the flowering of theJazz Age.[c]Rebounding from Isabelle, he becomes infatuated withRosalind Connage, a cruel and narcissisticflapper. Desperate for a job, Amory obtains employment with an advertising agency but detests the work. His relationship with Rosalind deteriorates as she prefers a rival suitor, Dawson Ryder, a man of wealth and status. Rejected by Rosalind due to his lack of financial prospects, Amory quits his advertising job and goes on adrinking bingeuntil the start ofprohibition in the United States.

When Amory travels to visit an uncle in Maryland, he meets Eleanor Savage, a beautiful and reckless atheist. Eleanor chafes under the religious conformity and gender limitations imposed on her by contemporary society inWilsonian America. Amory and Eleanor spend a lazy summer conversing about love. On their final night together before Amory returns to New York City, Eleanor attempts suicide by riding her horse over a cliff in order to prove her disbelief in any deity. At the last moment, she leaps to safety as her horse plummets over the precipice, and Amory realizes that he does not love her.

Returning to New York City, Amory learns of Rosalind's engagement to his wealthy rival Dawson Ryder, and he declares that Rosalind is now dead to him. The death of his beloved mentor, Monsignor Darcy, further dispirits him. Homeless, Amory wanders from New York City to his alma mater Princeton. Accepting a car ride from a wealthy upper-class man driven by his working-class chauffeur in aLocomobile, Amory speaks out in favor ofsocialismin the United States—although he admits he is still formulating his thoughts as he is talking.

While riding in the Locomobile, Amory continues his argument about their time's societal ills and articulates his disillusionment with the current historical era. He announces his hope to stand alongside those in the younger generation and to bring fortha new agein America. Both the upper-class and working-class men in the car denounce his views, but when Amory discovers that the upper-class man is the father of a Princeton classmate who died in World War I, they reconcile. Amory parts ways with his travel companions, and the upper-class man tells him: "Good luck to you and bad luck to your theories."

Approaching Princeton, Amory recognizes his selfishness as well as his overindulgence in drink and beauty. He realizes that he must transcend these flaws to become a better man. Wandering through a graveyard at twilight, he reflects upon his inevitable mortality and finds solace in the fact that future generations may one day ponder his life. He thinks of the next generation—inheriting disillusionment and a loss of faith, yet still chasing love and success. After midnight, he stands alone gazing at Princeton'sgothic towersand feels a newfound freedom. He stretches out his arms and proclaims, "I know myself . . . but that is all."[32]