The story begins before thewolf-dog hybridis born, with two men and theirsled dogteam on a journey to deliver the coffin of Lord Alfred to a remote town named Fort McGurry in the higher area of theYukon Territory. The men, Bill and Henry, are stalked by a large pack of starving wolves over the course of several days. Finally, after all of their dogs and Bill have been eaten, more teams find Henry escaping from the wolves; the wolf pack scatters when they hear the large group of people coming.

The story then follows the pack, which has been robbed of its last prey. When the pack finally brings down a moose, thefamineis ended; they eventually split up, and the story now follows a she-wolf and her mate, One Eye. One Eye claimed her after defeating and killing a younger rival. The she-wolf gives birth to alitterof five pups by theMackenzie River, and all but one die from hunger. One Eye is killed by alynxwhile trying to rob her den for food for the she-wolf and her pup; his mate later discovers his remains near the lynx's den. The surviving pup and the she-wolf are left to fend for themselves. Shortly afterward, the she-wolf kills all the lynx's kittens to feed her pup, prompting the lynx to track her down, and a vicious fight breaks out. The she-wolf eventually kills the lynx but suffers severe injury; the lynx carcass is devoured over a period of seven days as the she-wolf recovers from her injuries.

One day, the pup comes across fiveindigenouspeople, and the she-wolf comes to his rescue. One man, Grey Beaver, recognizes the she-wolf as his late brother's wolfdog, Kiche, who left during a famine. Grey Beaver's brother is dead, and so he takes Kiche and her pup and names the cub "White Fang". White Fang has a harsh life in the native camp; the current puppy pack, seeing him as a wolf, immediately attacks him. The Natives protect him, but the pups never accept him, and the pups' leader, Lip-Lip, singles him out for persecution. White Fang grows to become a savage, callous, morose, solitary, and deadly fighter, "the enemy of his kind".

It is at this time that White Fang is separated from his mother, who is sold off to another Native camp by Three Eagles. He earns the respect of Grey Beaver when he saves his son Mit-Sah from a group of boys seeking revenge for White Fang attacking one of them for trying to beat him for no reason. When a famine occurs, he runs away into the woods and encounters his mother Kiche, only for her to chase him away, for she has a new litter of cubs and has forgotten him. He also encounters Lip-Lip, whom he fights and kills before returning to the camp.

When White Fang is five years old, he is taken toFort Yukon, so that Grey Beaver can trade with the gold-hunters. There, a maliciousdog-fighternamed "Beauty" Smith connives to get Grey Beaver addicted to whiskey, and then when drunk sell White Fang to him. White Fang defeats all opponents pitted against him, including several wolves and a lynx, until abulldogcalled Cherokee is brought in to fight him. Cherokee has the upper hand in the fight when he grips the skin and fur of White Fang's neck and begins to throttle him. White Fang nearly suffocates, but is rescued when a rich mining expert, Weedon Scott, stops the fight, and forcibly buys White Fang from Beauty Smith.

Scott attempts to tame White Fang, and after a long, patient effort, he succeeds. When Scott attempts to return to California alone, White Fang pursues him, and Scott decides to take the dog with him back home. In Sierra Vista, White Fang must adjust to the laws of the estate. At the end of the book, an escaped convict, Jim Hall, tries to kill Scott's father, Judge Scott, for sentencing him to prison for a crime he did not commit, not knowing that Hall was "railroaded". White Fang kills Hall and is nearly killed himself, but survives. As a result, the women of Scott's estate name him "The Blessed Wolf". The story ends with White Fang relaxing in the sun with the puppies he has fathered with the sheep-dog Collie.

Major human characters:

Critics have identified many underlying themes in the novel. Tom Feller describes the story as "an allegory of humanity's progression from nature to civilization".[1]He also expresses that "the [story's] implication is that the metamorphosis of both the individual and society will require violence at some point."[1]Paul Deane states that "[in the novel] society demands a conformity that undermines individualism."[2]London himself took influence fromHerbert Spencer's words: "survival of the fittest", as well asFriedrich Nietzsche's idea of a "superman" (or "superdog", in this instance) and of "the worship of power".[1]

The novel is partly an autobiographicalallegorybased on London's conversion from teenage hoodlum to married, middle-class writer.[1]In writing it, he was influenced by the ideas ofHerbert Spencer,Karl Marx, andFriedrich Nietzsche.[1]Conditions in the US also influenced the story.[1]

Since the novel has been published it has been translated into over 89 different languages and released as a three-volumeBrailleedition.[3]

Upon its release,White Fangwas an immediate success worldwide,[4]and became especially popular among younger readers.[5]Robert Greenwood calledWhite Fang"one of London's most interesting and ambitious works."[3]Virginia Crane claims that the novel is "generally regarded as artistically inferior to its companion piece [The Call of the Wild], but [that it] helped establish London as a popular American literary figure".[5]

Shortly after the book's publication, London became a target in what would later be called thenature fakers controversy, a literary debate highlighting the conflict between science and sentiment in popularnature writing. PresidentTheodore Roosevelt, who first spoke out against the "sham naturalists" in 1907, specifically named London as one of the so-called "nature fakers". Citing an example fromWhite Fang, Roosevelt referred to the fight between the bulldog and the wolfdog "the very sublimity of absurdity."[6]London only responded to the criticism after the controversy had ended. In a 1908 essay entitled "The Other Animals", he wrote:

The novel has been adapted into numerous pictures and sequels, animated specials, as well as an audiobook format.[4]A television series,White Fang, was filmed inArrowtown, New Zealand, in 1993.