The novel has 100 chapters that can be divided into four unequal parts.

The first part, which includes chapters 1–7, is a self-contained introduction to the main story. It deals entirely with the earlier exploits ofSun Wukong, amonkeyborn from a stone nourished by theFive Elements, who learns the art of theTao, 72 polymorphic transformations,[15]combat, and secrets of immortality, and whose guile and force earns him the nameQitian Dasheng(simplified Chinese:齐天大圣;traditional Chinese:齊天大聖), or "Great Sage Equal to Heaven." His powers grow to match the forces of all of the Eastern (Taoist) deities, and the prologue culminates in Sun's rebellion against Heaven, during a time when he garnered a post in thecelestial bureaucracy.Hubrisproves his downfall when theBuddhamanages to trap him under a mountain, sealing it with a talisman for 500 years. His given name loosely means "Monkey Awakened toEmptiness(Śūnyatā)", and appears right away in chapter 13 and becomesTang Sanzang's firstdisciplein the journey. The most intelligent, the most powerful, and the most violent of thedisciples, he is constantly reproved for his violence byTang Sanzang. Ultimately, he can only be controlled by a magic gold ring that Guanyin has placed around his head, which causes him unbearable headaches when Sanzang chants the Ring Tightening Mantra.  In the story, Wukong is an allegorical representation of the human mind and thought andimpulse, and is often nicknamed the "Monkey mind".

The second part (chapters 8–12) introducesTang Sanzangthrough his early biography and the background to his great journey. Dismayed that "the land of the South(i.e.Tang China) knows only greed, hedonism, promiscuity, and sins," the Buddha instructs thebodhisattvaAvalokiteśvara(Guanyin) to search China for someone to take the Buddhist sutras of "transcendence and persuasion for good will" back. Part of this section also relates to how Tang Sanzang becomes a monk (as well as revealing his past life as a disciple of the Buddha named "Golden Cicada" (金蟬子Jīn Chánzi) and comes about being sent on this pilgrimage byEmperor Taizong, who previously escaped death with the help of an official in theUnderworld.  In the story, Tang Sanzang is considered an allegorical representation of the human heart.

The third and longest section of the work is chapters 13–99, an episodic adventure story in which Tang Sanzang sets out to bring back Buddhist scriptures from Leiyin Temple onVulture Peakin India, but encounters various evils along the way. The section is set in the sparsely populated lands along theSilk Roadbetween China and India. The geography described in the book is, however, almost entirely fantasy; once Tang Sanzang departsChang'an, the Tang capital, and crosses the frontier (somewhere inGansuprovince), he finds himself in a wilderness of deep gorges and tall mountains, inhabited by demons and animal spirits who regard him as a potential meal (since his flesh was believed to give immortality to whoever ate it), with the occasional hidden monastery or royal city-state amidst the harsh setting.

Episodes consist of 1–4 chapters and usually involve Tang Sanzang being captured and having his life threatened while his disciples try to find an ingenious (and often violent) way of liberating him. Although some of Tang Sanzang's predicaments are political and involve ordinary human beings, they more frequently consist of run-ins with various demons, many of whom turn out to be earthly manifestations of heavenly beings (whose sins will be negated by eating the flesh of Tang Sanzang) or animal-spirits with enough Taoist spiritual merit to assume semi-human forms.

Chapters 13–22 do not follow this structure precisely, as they introduceTang Sanzang's 3 otherdisciples, besidesSun Wukong, who inspired or goaded byGuanyin, meet and agree to serve him along the way in order to atone for their sins in their past lives.

Chapter 22, where Sha Wujing is introduced, also provides a geographical boundary, as the river that the travelers cross brings them into a new "continent." Chapters 23–86 take place in the wilderness, and consist of 24 episodes of varying length, each characterized by a different magical monster or evil magician. There are impassibly wide rivers,flaming mountains, a kingdom with an all-female population, a lair of seductive spider spirits, and many other scenarios. Throughout the journey, the four disciples have to fend off attacks on their master and teacher Tang Sanzang from various monsters and calamities.

It is strongly suggested that most of these calamities are engineered by fate and/or the Buddha, as, while the monsters who attack are vast in power and many in number, no real harm ever comes to the four travelers. Some of the monsters turn out to be escaped celestial beasts belonging to bodhisattvas or Taoist sages and deities. Towards the end of the book, there is a scene where the Buddha commands the fulfillment of the last disaster, because Tang Sanzang is one short of the 81 tribulations required before attainingBuddhahood.

In chapter 87, Tang Sanzang finally reaches the borderlands of India, and chapters 87–99 present magical adventures in a somewhat more mundane setting. At length, after a pilgrimage said to have taken fourteen years (the text actually only provides evidence for nine of those years, but presumably there was room to add additional episodes) they arrive at the half-real, half-legendary destination ofVulture Peak, where, in a scene simultaneously mystical and comic, Tang Sanzang receives the scriptures from the living Buddha.

Chapter 100, the final chapter, quickly describes the return journey to the Tang Empire, and the aftermath in which each traveller receives a reward in the form of posts in the bureaucracy of the heavens. Sun Wukong and Tang Sanzang both achieveBuddhahood, Sha Wujing becomes anarhat, Bai Long Ma is made anāgaand Zhu Bajie, whose good deeds have always been tempered by his greed, is promoted to an altar cleanser (i.e. eater of excess offerings at altars).