The novel begins as John Jasper leaves a Londonopium den.[5]He is the choirmaster at Cloisterham Cathedral. The next evening, he is visited by his nephew, Edwin Drood. Edwin confides that he has misgivings about his betrothal to Rosa Bud, which had been arranged by their fathers. The next day, Edwin visits Rosa at the Nuns' House, the boarding school where she lives. They quarrel good-naturedly, which they apparently do frequently during his visits. Meanwhile, Jasper, having an interest in the cathedral crypt, seeks the company of Durdles, a man who knows more about the crypt than anyone else.

Neville Landless and his twin sister Helena are sent to Cloisterham for their education. Neville will study with theminor canonthe Rev. Septimus Crisparkle; Helena will live at the Nuns' House with Rosa. Neville confides to Mr Crisparkle that he had hated his cruel stepfather, while Rosa confides to Helena that she loathes and fears Jasper, who is her music master. Neville is immediately smitten with Rosa and is indignant that Edwin treats his betrothal so lightly. Edwin provokes him and he reacts violently, which gives Jasper the opportunity to spread rumours that Neville has a violent temper. Mr Crisparkle tries to reconcile Edwin and Neville; Neville agrees to apologise to Edwin if Edwin will forgive him. It is arranged that they will dine together for this purpose on Christmas Eve at Jasper's home.

Rosa's guardian, Mr Grewgious, tells her that she has a substantial inheritance from her father. When she asks whether there would be any forfeiture if she did not marry Edwin, he replies that there would be none on either side. Back at his office in London, Mr Grewgious gives Edwin a ring which Rosa's father had given to her mother, with the proviso that Edwin must either give the ring to Rosa as a sign of his irrevocable commitment to her or return it to Mr Grewgious. Mr Bazzard, Mr Grewgious's clerk, witnesses this transaction.

Next day, Rosa and Edwin amicably agree to end their betrothal.  They decide to ask Mr Grewgious to break the news to Jasper, and Edwin intends to return the ring to Mr Grewgious. Meanwhile, Durdles takes Jasper into the cathedralcrypt. On the way there Durdles points out a mound ofquicklime. Jasper provides Durdles with a bottle of wine. The wine is mysteriously potent and Durdles loses consciousness; while unconscious he dreams that Jasper goes off by himself in the crypt. As Jasper and Durdles return from the crypt, they encounter a boy called Deputy; Jasper, thinking he was spying on them, takes him by the throat but, realising that this will strangle him, lets him go.

On Christmas Eve, Neville buys himself a heavy walking stick; he plans to spend his Christmas break hiking in the countryside. Meanwhile, Edwin visits a jeweller to get his pocket watch repaired; it is mentioned that the only jewellery he wears is the watch and chain and a shirt pin. By chance he meets a woman who is an opium user from London. She asks Drood's Christian name and he replies that it is "Edwin"; she says he is fortunate it is not "Ned", for "Ned" is in great danger. He thinks nothing of this, for the only person who calls him "Ned" is Jasper. Meanwhile, Jasper buys himself a black scarf of strong silk, which is not seen again during the course of the novel. The reconciliation dinner is successful and at midnight Edwin Drood and Neville Landless leave together to go down to the river and look at a storm that rages that night.

The next morning Edwin is missing and Jasper encourages suspicions that Neville has killed him. Neville leaves early in the morning for his hike; the townspeople overtake him and forcibly bring him back to the city. Mr Crisparkle keeps Neville out of jail by taking responsibility for him, stating that he will produce Neville any time his presence is required. That night, Jasper is strongly affected when Mr Grewgious informs him that Edwin and Rosa have ended their betrothal; he reacts more strongly to this news than to the possibility that Edwin may be dead. The next morning, Mr Crisparkle goes to the riverweirand finds Edwin's watch and chain and shirt pin.

Half a year later, Neville is living in London near Mr Grewgious's office. Lieutenant Tartar introduces himself and offers to share his garden with Neville; Lt Tartar's chambers are adjacent to Neville's above a common courtyard.

A white-haired and whiskered stranger calling himself Dick Datchery arrives in Cloisterham. He rents a room below Jasper's and observes the comings and goings in the area. Going to his lodgings for the first time, Mr Datchery asks Deputy for directions. Deputy will not go near the lodgings for fear that Jasper will choke him again.

Jasper visits Rosa at the Nuns' House and professes his love for her. She rejects him but he persists, telling her that if she gives him no hope he will destroy Neville, the brother of her dear friend Helena. In fear of Jasper, Rosa flees to Mr Grewgious in London.

The next day Mr Crisparkle follows Rosa to London. While he is with her and Mr Grewgious, Lt Tartar calls and asks if he remembers him. Mr Crisparkle does remember him, as the person who years before saved him from drowning. They do not dare let Rosa contact Neville and Helena directly, for fear that Jasper may be watching Neville, but Lt Tartar allows Rosa to visit his chambers to contact Helena above the courtyard. Mr Grewgious arranges for Rosa to rent a place from Mrs Billickin and for Miss Twinkleton to live with her there for respectability.

Jasper visits the London opium den again for the first time since Edwin's disappearance. When he leaves, at dawn, the woman who runs the opium den follows him. She vows to herself that she will not lose his trail again, as she had done after his last visit. This time, she follows him all the way to his home in Cloisterham; outside it she meets Datchery, who tells her Jasper's name and that he will sing in the cathedral service the next morning. On inquiry, Datchery learns she is called "Princess Puffer". The next morning she attends the service and shakes her fists at Jasper from behind a pillar, observed by both Datchery and Deputy.

Dickens's death leaves the rest of the story unknown.  According to his friend and biographerJohn Forster, after writing him two brief letters which relate to the plot (but not the murder) Dickens had supplied Forster with an outline of the full plot:

Edwin Drood's fate is not clear. His killer, if any, is not revealed but is generally believed to be John Jasper, his uncle, for three reasons:

The book gives other hints:

Datchery appears some time after Edwin's disappearance and keeps a close eye on Jasper. There are hints that he is in disguise, and this possibility has been taken up in adaptations of the story which try to solve the mystery:

The Mystery of Edwin Droodwas scheduled to be published in twelve instalments (fewer than Dickens's usual twenty) from April 1870 to February 1871, each costing oneshillingand illustrated byLuke Fildes. Only six of the instalments were completed before Dickens's death in 1870. It was therefore approximately half-finished.

Planned instalments never published:

Supplying a conclusion toThe Mystery of Edwin Droodhas occupied writers from Dickens's death to the present day.

The first three attempts to complete the story were undertaken by Americans. The first, byRobert Henry Newell, published under the pen name Orpheus C. Kerr in 1870,[10]was as much a parody as a continuation, transplanting the story to the United States. It is a "burlesque" farce rather than a serious attempt to continue in the spirit of the original story.

The second ending was written by Henry Morford, a New York journalist. He travelled to Rochester with his wife and published the ending serially during his stay in England from 1871 to 1872. In this ending, Edwin Drood survives Jasper's murder attempt. Datchery is Bazzard in disguise, but Helena disguises herself as well to overhear Jasper's mumbling under the influence of opium. It was titledJohn Jasper's Secret: Sequel to Charles Dickens' Mystery of Edwin Drood. Newspaper articles from 1870 confirmed that the story would be completed and authored byCharles Dickens, JrandWilkie Collins, despite Collins's disavowal. The illustrative green cover for the book was designed by Charles Allston Collins,[11]who was Charles Dickens's son-in-law and Wilkie Collins's brother.[12][13]

The third attempt was perhaps the most unusual. In 1873, aBrattleboro, Vermont, printer,Thomas Power James, published a version which he claimed had been literally 'ghost-written' by him channelling Dickens's spirit.[14][15][16]A sensation was created:  several critics praised this version, includingArthur Conan Doyle, himself a spiritualist, who said it was similar in style to Dickens's work; and for several decades the James version ofEdwin Droodwas common in America. OtherDroodscholars disagree. John C. Walters dismissed it with contempt, stating that the work "is self-condemned by its futility, illiteracy, and hideous American mannerisms; the mystery itself becomes a nightmare, and the solution only deepens the obscurity."[17]

Four of the most recent of the posthumous collaborations areThe Mystery of Edwin DroodbyLeon Garfield(1980),The Decoding of Edwin Drood(1980) by Charles Forsyte,The Disappearance of Edwin Drood, a Holmesian pastiche by Peter Rowland (1992), andThe Mystery of Edwin Droodby David Madden (2011).[18]The D Case(1989) offered a humorous literary critique by the Italian duoFruttero & Lucentini.

On 7 January 1914 theDickens Fellowshiporganised a dramatic "trial" in the King's Hall,Covent Garden, in which John Jasper stood accused of the murder of Edwin Drood. Appearing as witnesses in "court" were five characters from the Dickens novel, as well as a jury and court officials, mostly played by writers, actors and other leading personalities of the day.

G. K. Chesterton, best known for theFather Brownmystery stories, was the Judge. The author ofThe Complete Edwin Drood,J. Cuming Walters, led the prosecution, while W. Walter Crotch andCecil Chestertonacted for the defence, and the latter's future wife,Ada Elizabeth Jones(appearing under her pseudonymMiss J. K. Prothero) was Princess Puffer.Bransby Williams, well known for his stage monologues as Dickens characters, was Anthony Durdles. Authors and scholarsArthur Waugh, C. Sheridan Jones and Mrs Laurence Clay, played Crisparkle, Bazzard and Helena Landless respectively, while the part of John Jasper was taken by amateur actor Frederick T. Harry.[19]

Foreman of the jury wasGeorge Bernard Shaw. Other jurors were selected from a list of nineteen named in the programme.  A copy of this, annotated by its original owner, suggests that the others on the jury bench wereWilliam Wymark Jacobs,William Pett Ridge,Tom Gallon,William de Morgan,Arthur Morrison, Raymond Paton,Francesco Berger,Ridgwell Callum,Justin Huntly McCarthy,Oscar BrowningandWilliam Archer.[19]

Proceedings were very light-hearted; Shaw in particular made wisecracks at the expense of others present. For instance, Shaw said that if the prosecution thought that producing evidence would influence the jury then "he little knows his functions".[20]

The jury returned a verdict ofmanslaughter, Shaw stating that it was a compromise on the grounds that there was not enough evidence to convict Jasper but that they did not want to run the risk of being murdered in their beds. Both sides protested and demanded that the jury be discharged. Shaw said the jury would be only too pleased to be discharged. Chesterton ruled that the mystery of Edwin Drood was insoluble and fined everyone, except himself, for contempt of court.[21]

To date, there have been four film adaptations ofThe Mystery of Edwin Drood.

The first two silent pictures released in 1909 (British)[22]and 1914 (American)[23]are unavailable to the general public and have been little seen since they were released. They were followed by:

The Mystery of Edwin Drood(1960) was a British television miniseries produced byITVand broadcast live in eight episodes, starringDonald Sindenas John Jasper,Richard Pearsonas Mr Crisparkle andTim Seelyas Edwin Drood.[24]This serial is believed to be lost, as no audio or video recordings are known to exist. Photographs taken from contemporary newspaper clippings exist with theBFI.

There wasa 2012 BBC television version, adapted with an original ending byGwyneth Hughesand directed byDiarmuid Lawrence, which aired on BBC Two on 10 and 11 January 2012 and on the PBS seriesMasterpieceon 15 April 2012.[25][26]

Taina Edvina Druda(The Mystery of Edwin Drood) is a TV miniseries produced in Russia in 1980, adapted by Georgiy Kapralov and Alexander Orlov, directed by Alexander Orlov and with music byEduard Artemiev. The cast includedValentin Gaft, Avangard Leontiev,Elena KorenevaandMargarita Terekhova.

On 5 and 12 January 1953, the CBSSuspenseradio programme aired a two-part adaptation ofThe Mystery of Edwin Drood. It depicts John Jasper (played byHerbert Marshall) as the killer, tricked into giving himself away.[27]

In 1965, forRadio 4's long-running "Saturday Night Theatre",Mollie Hardwickadapted the novel and suggested an ending.[28]The cast includedFrancis de Wolffas the Narrator, John Gabriel as John Jasper,Mary Wimbushas Princess Puffer,Patrick Barras Crisparkle,Malcolm Terrisas Edwin Drood,Rosalind Shanksas Rosa, Nigel Graham as Neville Landless, Isabel Rennie as Helena Landless andDenys Blakelockas Mr Grewgious. It was repeated on 4 October 1970.[29]The play is held in the BBC Archives (T42136, 89'40"), and an off-air recording exists.

A five-part adaptation based on the Leon Garfield completion written by David Buck and directed by Gordon House was broadcast asBBC Radio 4'sClassic Serialfrom 3 to 30 March 1990.[30]The cast includedIan Holmas Jasper,John Moffattas Datchery,Gareth Thomasas Crisparkle,Michael Cochraneas Tartar,Timothy Batesonas Sapsea,Gordon Gostelowas Durdles andAnna Cropperas Mrs Tope;Mary Wimbushreprised her 1965 role of Princess Puffer and John Gabriel returned to play the role of Mr Grewgious.  It was last repeated onBBC Radio 4 Extrafrom 27 September to 1 October 2021.

A 10-part adaptation in 15-minute daily episodes, this time written byMike Walkerand directed byJeremy Mortimer, was broadcast onBBC Radio 4from 21 December 2020 to 1 January 2021.[31]The cast includedPippa NixonasKate Dickens(who acts as both narrator and commentator), Joel MacCormack as John Jasper, Isabella Inchbald as Rosa,Damian Lynchas Crisparkle, Rachel Atkins as Princess Puffer, Maanuv Thiara as Neville Landless, Halema Hussain as Helena Landless,Peter Davisonas Mr Grewgious and Iwan Davies as Edwin Drood. Some characters, including Lt Tartar and Mayor Sapsea, are omitted from this version and Bazzard, though mentioned by Mr Grewgious, does not appear. In this adaptation, Helena disguises herself as Dick Datchery, Edwin Drood survives the attack from Jasper, and Jasper kills himself by jumping from the cathedral tower after it is revealed that he was in love with Edwin, a major departure from his character and motivations in the original novel and other adaptations.