Set inSoho, Londonin 1886, the novel follows the life of Adolf Verloc, asecret agent. Verloc is also a businessman who owns a shop which sells pornographic material, contraceptives andbric-a-brac. He lives with his wife Winnie, his mother-in-law, and his brother-in-law, Stevie. Stevie has a mental disability, possiblyautism,[6]which causes him to be excitable; his sister, Verloc's wife, attends to him, treating him more as a son than as a brother. Verloc's friends are a group of anarchists of which Comrade Ossipon, Michaelis, and "The Professor" are the most prominent. Although largely ineffectual as terrorists, their actions are known to the police. The group produces anarchist literature in the form of pamphlets entitledF.P., an acronym forThe Future of theProletariat.

The novel begins in Verloc's home, as he and his wife discuss the trivialities of everyday life, which introduces the reader to Verloc's family. Soon after, Verloc leaves to meet Mr Vladimir, the new First Secretary in the embassy of a foreign country, for whom he works as anagent provocateur. Vladimir informs Verloc that from reviewing his service history he is far from an exemplary model of a secret agent and, to redeem himself, must carry out an operation – the destruction ofGreenwich Observatoryby a bomb. Vladimir explains that Britain's lax attitude to anarchism endangers his own country, and he reasons that an attack on 'science', the current vogue amongst the public, will provide the necessary outrage for suppression. Verloc later meets his friends, who discuss politics and law, and the notion of acommunist revolution. Unbeknownst to the group, Stevie, Verloc's brother-in-law, overhears the conversation, which greatly disturbs him.

The novel flashes forward to after the bombing has taken place. Comrade Ossipon meets The Professor, who discusses having given explosives to Verloc. The Professor describes the nature of the bomb he carries in his coat at all times: it allows him to press a button which will kill him and those nearest to him in twenty seconds.  After The Professor leaves the meeting, he stumbles intoChief InspectorHeat, a policeman investigating a recent explosion at Greenwich, where one man was killed.  Heat informs The Professor that he is not a suspect in the case, but that he is being monitored due to his terrorist inclinations and anarchist background. Heat suspects Michaelis. Knowing that Michaelis has recently moved to thecountrysideto write a book, the Chief Inspector informs theAssistant Commissionerthat he has a contact, Verloc, who may be able to assist in the case. The Assistant Commissioner shares some of the same high society acquaintances with Michaelis and is chiefly motivated by finding the extent of Michaelis's involvement in order to assess any possible embarrassment to his connections. He later speaks to his superior, Sir Ethelred, about his intentions to solve the case alone, rather than rely on the effort of Chief Inspector Heat.

The novel flashes back to before the explosion, taking the perspective of Winnie Verloc and her mother. At home, Winnie's mother informs the family that she intends to move out of the house. The move is motivated largely by a desire to avoid straining Mr. Verloc’s kindness. Winnie's mother and Stevie use ahansomdriven by a man with a hook for a hand. The driver's tales of hardship, whipping of his horse, and menacing hook scare Stevie to the point where Mrs Verloc must calm him. On Verloc's return from a business trip to the continent, his wife tells him of the high regard that Stevie has for him and she implores her husband to spend more time with Stevie. Verloc eventually agrees to go for a walk with Stevie. After this walk, Winnie notes that her husband's relationship with her brother has improved. Verloc tells his wife that he has taken Stevie to go and visit Michaelis, and that Stevie would stay with him in the countryside for a few days.

As Verloc is talking to his wife about the possibility of emigrating to the continent, he is paid a visit by the Assistant Commissioner. Shortly thereafter, Chief Inspector Heat arrives to speak with Verloc, without knowing that the Assistant Commissioner had left with Verloc earlier that evening.  The Chief Inspector tells Winnie that he had recovered an overcoat at the scene of the bombing which had the shop's address written on a label.  Winnie confirms that it was Stevie's overcoat, and that she had written the address. On Verloc's return, he realises that his wife knows that his bomb killed her brother, and confesses what truly happened. A stunned Winnie, in her anguish, fatally stabs her husband.

After the murder, Winnie flees her home, where she chances upon Comrade Ossipon, and begs him to help her. Ossipon assists her while confessing romantic feelings but secretly with a view to possess Mr Verloc's bank account savings.  They plan to run away and he aids her in taking a boat to the continent. However, her instability and the revelation of Verloc's murder increasingly worry him, and he abandons her, taking Mr Verloc's savings with him. He later discovers in a newspaper that a woman matching Winnie's description disappeared from the ferry, leaving behind her wedding ring before drowning herself in theEnglish Channel.

Conrad's character Stevie is based on the French anarchistMartial Bourdinwho died gruesomely when the explosives he carried detonated prematurely.[8]Bourdin's motives remain a mystery as does his intended target, which may have been theGreenwich Observatory.[9]In the 1920 Author's Note to the novel, Conrad recalls a discussion withFord Madox Fordabout the bombing:[10]

Terrorism and anarchism are intrinsic aspects of the novel, and are central to the plot. Verloc is employed by an agency which requires him to orchestrate terrorist activities, and several of the characters deal with terrorism in some way: Verloc's friends are all interested in an anarchisticpoliticalrevolution, and the police are investigating anarchist motives behind the bombing of Greenwich.

The novel was written at a time when terrorist activity was increasing. There had been numerous dynamite attacks in both Europe and the US, as well as several assassinations of heads of state.[12]Conrad also drew upon two persons specifically:Mikhail Bakuninand PrincePeter Kropotkin. Conrad used these two men in his "portrayal of the novel's anarchists".[13]However, according to Conrad's Author's Note, only one character was a true anarchist: Winnie Verloc. InThe Secret Agent, she is "the only character who performs a serious act of violence against another",[14]despite theF.P.'s intentions of radical change, and The Professor's inclination to keep a bomb on his person.

Critics have analysed the role of terrorism in the novel.Patrick Reillycalls the novel "a terrorist text as well as a text about terrorism"[15]due to Conrad's manipulation ofchronologyto allow the reader to comprehend the outcome of the bombing before the characters, thereby corrupting the traditional conception of time. Themoralitywhich is implicit in these acts of terrorism has also been explored: is Verloc evil because his negligence leads to the death of his brother-in-law? Although Winnie evidently thinks so, the issue is not clear, as Verloc attempted to carry out the act with no fatalities, and as simply as possible to retain his job, and care for his family.[16]

The role of politics is paramount in the novel, as the main character, Verloc, works for a quasi-political organisation. The role of politics is seen in several places in the novel: in the revolutionary ideas of theF.P.; in the characters' personalbeliefs; and in Verloc's own private life. Conrad's depiction ofanarchismhas an "enduring political relevance", although the focus is now largely concerned with the terrorist aspects that this entails.[17]The discussions of theF.P.are expositions on the role of anarchism and its relation to contemporary life. The threat of these thoughts is evident, as Chief Inspector Heat knowsF.P.members because of their anarchist views. Moreover, Michaelis' actions are monitored by the police to such an extent that he must notify the police station that he is moving to the country.

The plot to destroy Greenwich is in itself anarchistic. Vladimir asserts that the bombing "must be purely destructive" and that the anarchists who will be implicated as the architects of the explosion "should make it clear that [they] are perfectly determined to make a clean sweep of the whole social creation."[18]However, the political form of anarchism is ultimately controlled in the novel: the only supposed politically motivated act is orchestrated by a secret government agency.

Some critics, such as Fredrick R Karl,[19]think that the main politicalphenomenonin this novel is the modern age, assymbolisedby the teeming, pullulating foggy streets of London (most notably in the cab ride taken by Winnie Verloc and Stevie).  This modern age distorts everything, including politics (Verloc is motivated by the need to keep his remunerative position, the Professor to some extent by pride); the family (symbolised by the Verloc household, in which all roles are distorted, with the husband being like a father to the wife, who is like a mother to her brother); even the human body (Michaelis and Verloc are hugely obese, while the Professor and Yundt are unusually thin). This extendedmetaphor, using London as a centre of darkness much like Kurtz's headquarters inHeart of Darkness,[20]presents "a dark vision ofmoraland spiritual inertia" and a condemnation of those who, like Mrs Verloc, think it a mistake to think too deeply.[21]

Initially, the novel fared poorly in the United Kingdom and the United States, selling only 3,076 copies between 1907 and 1914. The book fared slightly better in Britain, yet no more than 6,500 copies were printed before 1914. Although sales increased after 1914, it never sold more than modestly during Conrad's life. It was published to favourable reviews, most agreeing with the view ofThe Times Literary Supplementthat it "increase[d] Conrad's reputation, already of the highest".[22]However, there were detractors who criticised the novel's "unpleasant characters and subject".Country Lifemagazine called the story "indecent" and criticised Conrad's "often dense andellipticalstyle".[22]

The Secret Agenthas come to be considered one of Conrad's finest novels.The Independentcalls it "[o]ne of Conrad's great city novels"[23]whilstThe New York Timesinsists that it is "the most brilliant novelistic study of terrorism".[24]The Pequodcalled the book “one of Joseph Conrad's best books,” and rated the book a 9.5 out of 10.0.”[25]In a 2016 review,The National Reviewsaid the book “may be the first great novel of global terrorism.”[26]

The Secret AgentinfluencedTed Kaczynski, also known as theUnabomber. He was a great fan and as an adolescent kept a copy at his bedside.[27]He identified strongly with the character of "The Professor" and advised his family to readThe Secret Agentto understand the character with whom he felt such an affinity. Don Foster, the literary attributionist who assisted theFBI, said that Kaczynski "seem[ed] to have felt that his family could not understand him without reading Conrad".[28]

Kaczynski's idolisation of the character was due to the personality traits that they shared: disaffection, hostility toward the world, and being an aspiring anarchist.[29]However, it did not stop at mere idolisation. Kaczynski used "The Professor" as a source of inspiration, and "fabricated sixteen exploding packages that detonated in various locations".[30]After his capture, Kaczynski revealed to FBI agents that he had read the novel a dozen times, and had sometimes used "Conrad" as an alias.[31]It was discovered that Kaczynski had used various formulations of Conrad's name – Conrad, Konrad, and Korzeniowski, Conrad's original surname – to sign himself into several hotels in Sacramento.  As in his youth, Kaczynski retained a copy ofThe Secret Agent, and kept it with him while living as areclusein a hut inMontana.[12]

Various scenes from the novel were also dramatised inJoseph Conrad's The Secret Agent(1987), a 60-minute UK documentary featuringFrances Barber,Hywel Bennett,Jim BroadbentandBrian Glover.[4]

Audibleaudiobookshave produced at least 13 different unabridged readings of the novel, including in French, German and Spanish.[51]

Conrad's novel has been adapted as operas by Simon Wills (2006),Michael Dellaira(2011), and Allen Reichman and Curtis Bryant (2013).[4]