Richard Marwood returns to the home of his mother, Agnes, in Slopperton after an absence of seven years. His uncle, Montague Harding, having recently returned from theEast Indiesafter amassing a large fortune, is also staying there. After a brief reconciliation, Richard leaves swiftly on the encouragement of Montague, who promises him help in turning around his hitherto dissolute lifestyle; on his train journey away from the town, however, he is apprehended by two detectives, Mr. Jinks and themuteJoseph Peters, who charge him with the murder of his uncle on the night of his departure. Peters comes to suspect that Richard is innocent of the murder, and in the trial that follows manages to arrange that hepleads insane; subsequently, Richard is interred in a lunatic asylum. Meanwhile, the orphaned schoolmaster Jabez North kills a child under his care after he threatens to reveal Jabez's suspicious activity on the night of the murder. Later encountering his twin brother, on his deathbed in a derelict neighborhood of Slopperton, he switches places with the dying man; after finding a body on the heath, the police declare Jabez North to have committed suicide.

In Paris, the Spanish heiress Valerie de Cevennes is discovered by Jabez (now under the name of Raymond de Marolles) in a secret marriage with an opera singer, Gaston de Lancy. With the assistance of the fortune-teller and chemist Laurent Blurosset and a mimic, Raymond manipulates Valerie into believing that Gaston has been unfaithful to her, and she poisons him for betraying her trust. In the aftermath of the poisoning, Raymond blackmails Valerie into marrying him.

Eight years later, Richard's confinement is interrupted by the arrival of Joseph Peters' son, Sloshy. (The child is in fact the offspring of Jabez, left to die by its mother when he abandoned her.) Together with Augustus Darley, a friend of Richard's, the pair effect an escape for the prisoner. Subsequently, Richard travels to London and rejoins his former compatriots, the 'Cherokees'; they are later joined by Joseph and the housemaid Kuppins, with whom the detective has brought up Sloshy. The group resolve to vindicate Richard's innocence in the murder of his uncle and to find the guilty person. Meanwhile, Raymond (now the Count de Marolles) has established a household in London with Valerie, now his wife, and her son from her former relationship with Gaston.

Richard and Joseph Peters make headway in confirming that Jabez and Raymond are the same person. Meanwhile, Raymond discovers that the Marquis de Cevennes, Valerie's uncle, is actually his father. Valerie uncovers Raymond's plot, including the use of the mimic to trick her; when she confronts Laurent, however, he reveals that she did not in fact poison Gaston but merely drugged him—after the incident he fled Paris for a military life in India, and goes under the name of Captain Lansdown. Valerie calls her uncle, the Marquis, to London; his paternal connection to Raymond is revealed when the pair confront one another, but the meeting is interrupted by an attempt to apprehend the latter (the evidence of his involvement in the murder having grown in the meantime). Raymond manages to escape them and flees London.

Joseph and Augustus gather more evidence from Slopperton, and visit the house where the murder took place (now vacated by Agnes). The group suspect that Raymond will be on board a ship bound for New York; they eventually find him inside a coffin due to be taken aboard, and he is apprehended. In the subsequent trial, Raymond is found guilty of Montague's murder and sentenced to be hanged; he kills himself before the sentence is carried out. Valerie again marries Gaston, now Captain Lansdown, whilst Richard marries Augustus' sister, Isabella, who supported him during the efforts to prove his innocence; the two couples travel to South America to start new lives there.

Braddon wrote about the composition and publication history of the novel in an essay that first appeared in 1893, entitled 'My First Novel:The Trail of the Serpent'.[2]

The Sporting Gazetteremarked on the release of an 1866 edition of the novel by Ward, Lock, & Tyler: