The story is set in London during the year 1785. The plot concerns the strange disappearance of a sailor named Lieutenant Thornhill, last seen entering Sweeney Todd's establishment on Fleet Street. Thornhill was bearing a gift of astring of pearlsto a girl namedJohanna Oakleyon behalf of her missing lover, Mark Ingestrie, who is presumed lost at sea. One of Thornhill's seafaring friends, Colonel Jeffrey, is alerted to the disappearance of Thornhill by his faithful dog, Hector, and investigates his whereabouts. He is joined by Johanna, who wants to know what happened to Mark.

Johanna's suspicions of Sweeney Todd's involvement cause her to dress as a boy and become Todd's employee after his last assistant, a young boy namedTobias Ragg, has been incarcerated in amadhousefor accusing Todd of being a murderer. Soon, after Todd has dismembered the corpses of his victims, Mrs. Lovettcreates her meat pies from leftover flesh.  While the bodies are burning in the oven, a ghastly and intolerable smell reeks from the pie shop chimney.  Eventually, the extent of Todd's activities is uncovered when the dismembered remains of hundreds of his victims are discovered in thecryptunderneath St. Dunstan's church. Meanwhile, Mark, who has been imprisoned in the cellar beneath the pie shop and made to work as the cook, escapes via theliftused to bring the pies up from the cellar into the pie shop. Here he makes the following startling announcement to the customers of that establishment:

Mrs. Lovett is thenpoisonedby Sweeney Todd, who is subsequently apprehended and hanged. Johanna marries Mark.

The String of Pearls: A Romancewas published in 18 weekly parts, inEdward Lloyd'sThe People's Periodical and Family Library, issues 7–24, 21 November 1846 to 20 March 1847. It is frequently attributed toThomas Peckett Prest, but has been more recently been reassigned toJames Malcolm Rymer;[2]other names such as E.P Hingston have also been suggested. E.P. Hingston, at the time, was a resident of London. It is written like so many of his other works. E.P. Hingston at the time of this writing was looking for a way to make money until he set off on one of his new escapades. The story was then published in book form in 1850 as "The String of Pearls", subtitled "The Barber of Fleet Street. A Domestic Romance". This expanded version of the story was 732 pages long, and its conclusion differs greatly from that of the original serial publication: Todd escapes from prison after beingsentenced to deathbut, after many further adventures, is finally shot dead while fleeing from the authorities. In later years, there were many different literary,stageand eventuallymovie adaptationswhich renamed, further expanded and often drastically altered the original story.[1]

A scholarly,annotated editionofThe String of Pearlswas published in 2007 by theOxford University Presswith the titleSweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street, edited by Robert Mack.

Industrialisationis a theme that contributes to the story. Sweeney Todd owns a barber shop in the middle of one of the busiest industrial parts of the growing city of London. Industrialism resulted in an increasing crime rate, which was exploited by the penny dreadful stories.

While the author ofString of Pearlsis unknown, there are many theories surrounding its influences. During the 19th century, when this story was first written, a semi-common trade was what was termed abarber-surgeon. Barber-surgeons were medical practitioners trained not by schooling but byapprenticeship, and they were sometimesilliterate.Surgeryeventually became an established profession of its own and the two were separated legally byKing George IIin Britain during 1745.[3]

The 1612 French historical nonfiction bookLe Théâtre des Antiquités de Parisby FatherJacques du Breul[fr]contains a section titledDe la maison des Marmousets(From the house of the Marmousets) that mentions a "murderous pastry cook" who incorporates into his pie the meat of a man he murdered due to its alleged dietary benefits.[4]

It has been speculated that, "Joseph Fouché, who served as Minister of Police inParisfrom 1799 to 1815, had records in the archives of police that explored murders committed in the 1800s by a Parisian barber".[5]Fouché mentioned that the barber was in league with "a neighbouring pastry cook, who made pies out of the victims and sold them for human consumption".[5]There is question about the authenticity of this account, "yet the tale was republished in 1824 under the headlineA Terrific Story of the Rue de Le Harpe, ParisinThe Tell Tale, a London magazine. Perhaps Thomas Prest, scouring publications for ideas, read about the Paris case and stored it away for later use."[5]

Sweeney Todd's story also appears inThe Newgate Calendar, originally a bulletin of executions produced by the keeper ofNewgate Prison, the title of which was appropriated bychapbooks, popularpamphletsfull of entertaining, often violent criminal activities.[6]Despite this, there is no mention of Todd's trial or execution in official records, and thus no real evidence that he ever existed.[6]

Nopublic recordsprove any existence of a London barber by the name of Sweeney during the 18th century or of a barber shop located onFleet Street. There were manyword-of-mouth,true crimeand horror stories at the time however, reported in "The Old Bailey" section of theTimes of Londonas well as otherdaily newspapers. News also commonly travelled by word of mouth as the majority of the population was still illiterate, and could become embellished in the retelling from person to person. Such news might still be assumed factual because there was no way of proving otherwise at the time.[7]

InCharles Dickens'The Pickwick Papers(1836–37), Pickwick'scockneyservant Sam Weller states that a pieman used cats "forbeefsteak,vealandkidney, 'cording to the demand", and recommends that people should buy pies only "when you know the lady as made it, and is quite sure it ain't kitten".[8]Dickens expanded on the idea of using non-traditional sources for meat pie inMartin Chuzzlewit(1843–44). This was published two years beforeThe String of Pearls(1846–47) and included a character by the name of Tom Pinch, who feels lucky that his own "evil genius did not lead him into the dens of any of those preparers of cannibalic pastry, who are represented in many country legends as doing a lively retail business in the metropolis" and worries that John Westlock will "begin to be afraid that I have strayed into one of those streets where the countrymen are murdered; and that I have been made into meat pies, or some such horrible thing".[9][10]Peter Hainingsuggested in a 1993 book that Dickens was inspired by knowledge of the "real" Sweeney Todd, but that he chose not to mention him, in case some of his victims' relatives were still alive.[6]