Reporter and amateur sleuthJoseph Rouletabilleis sent to investigate acriminal caseat the Château du Glandier and takes along his friend the lawyer Sainclair, who narrates.  Mathilde Stangerson, the 30-something daughter of the castle's owner, Professor Joseph Stangerson, was found near-critically battered in a room adjacent to his laboratory on the castle grounds, with the door still locked from the inside.  She recovers slowly but can give no useful testimony.  Rouletabille meets and interrogates several characters: the castle's concierges Mr & Mrs Bernier, the old servant Jacques, an unfriendly inn landlord and a womanising gamekeeper, and begins a friendly rivalry with France's top police detective Frédéric Larsan, who has been assigned the case.  Larsan suspects Ms Stangerson's fiancé, another scientist called Robert Darzac, to Rouletabille's dismay.

More attempts are made on Ms Stangerson's life despite Rouletabille and Larsan's protection, and the perpetrator appears to vanish on two occasions when they are closing in on him, echoing Professor Stangerson's research into "matter dissociation".  The gamekeeper is murdered during the second attempt.  Ultimately, Larsan arrests Darzac who is charged with murder attempts.  Rouletabille suspects that Darzac has secret reasons not to defend himself and he disappears to make further investigations.

Two-and-a-half months later, as Darzac's trial opens, Rouletabille reappears sensationally and tells the court that the culprit is Frédéric Larsan himself, whom he accuses of being an alter-ego of a master criminal called Ballmeyer.  Larsan appeared to vanish on the two occasions he was nearly collared as he was one of the pursuers.  Darzac is released when it emerges that Larsan has vanished after Rouletabille warned him he would accuse him in court.  The mystery of the locked Yellow Room is explained thus: Larsan assaulted Ms Stangerson earlier in the day than originally thought, but she hid the traces of the attack and locked herself away.  During the night, traumatised by the event, she fell off her bed and inflicted the gravest of the wounds by hitting her temple on the corner of her bed-side table.

The background to these events is kept secret in court but finally explained by Sainclair.  Ballmeyer, in a different guise, had seduced Ms Stangerson in her youth and married her secretly in theUnited States.  They had a child before he was arrested and his identity revealed to her.  Ms Stangerson had arranged for her son's care and education and hidden the whole saga from her father; her silence and Robert Darzac's behaviour were motivated by her desperation to keep him from finding out.  Ballmeyer however, hearing that she was engaged, had decided to reappear in her life and claim her as his wife once more, by force if necessary.

John Dickson Carr, a writer of locked-room mysteries, has his detective Dr. Gideon Fell declare this the "best detective tale ever written", in his novelThe Hollow Man(1935).[2]

Agatha ChristiepraisedThe Mystery of the Yellow Roomthrough the mouthpiece of her detectiveHercule Poirotin her 1963 novelThe Clocks:[3]

In a 1981 poll byEdward D. Hochof 17 mystery writers and reviewers, this novel was voted the third-bestlocked-room mysteryof all time, behindHake Talbot'sRim of the Pit(1944) andJohn Dickson Carr'sThe Hollow Man(1935).[4]

The popular 1946 Japanese detective novelThe Honjin Murders(本陣殺人事件, Honjin satsujin jiken) bySeishi Yokomizorefers toThe Mystery of the Yellow Roomnumerous times, the narrator quipping that Leroux's novel "bears the closest resemblance" to the story recounted in the novel.

The final episode of the 2025NetflixminiseriesThe Residenceis titledThe Mystery of the Yellow Roomand concludes the series with a locked-room murder deduction.

Stage:

Film and TV:

Radio: