The story's narrator, a nobleman named Montresor, describes his revenge against fellow noble Fortunato. Angry over numerous injuries and an unspecified insult, Montresor resolves to avenge himself without being caught, and also to make sure that Fortunato knows he is responsible.

During the annualCarnivalseason, Montresor finds a drunken Fortunato and asks for his help in authenticating a recently purchasedpipe(about 130 gallons, or 492 litres) of what has been described to him as Amontillado wine. As the two descend to the wine cellars and catacombs beneath Montresor's home, Montresor expresses concern over Fortunato's persistent cough and the effect that the dampness will have on his health. Undeterred, Fortunato presses on, intent on sampling the Amontillado, and Montresor gives him more wine to keep him inebriated. Montresor describes his family coat of arms: a golden foot in a blue background crushing a snake whose fangs are embedded in the foot's heel, with the mottoNemo me impune lacessit("No one provokes me with impunity"). At one point, Fortunato makes a gesture that Montresor does not recognize and deduces that Montresor is not a mason. Montresor shows him atrowelas a joke, deliberately confusingFreemasonrywith the profession ofstonemasonry.

They arrive at a niche deep within the catacombs, where Montresor claims the Amontillado is stored. When Fortunato ventures inside, Montresor chains him to the wall, having devised the Amontillado ruse to lure him into this trap. Montresor sets to work walling up the niche, using supplies of stone and mortar he had previously hidden nearby. Fortunato quickly sobers up and tries to escape, but Montresor mocks his cries for help, knowing that no one can hear them. While Montresor continues to work, Fortunato tries to persuade Montresor to release him, first by suggesting that they treat the incident as a practical joke, and finally making a last desperate plea. As he falls silent, Montresor completes the wall and moves a pile of bones to hide it, feeling a sickness of heart that he dismisses as a reaction to the dampness of the catacombs.

Stating that the niche and Fortunato's body have stood undisturbed for 50 years, Montresor concludes his account by saying, "In pace requiescat!" ("May he rest in peace!").

"The Cask of Amontillado" was first published in the November 1846 issue ofGodey's Lady's Book,[1]which was, at the time, the most popular periodical in America.[2]The story was only published one additional time during Poe's life, in the November 14, 1846,New England Weekly Review.[3]

Although the subject matter of Poe's story is a murder, "The Cask of Amontillado" is not a tale of detection like "The Murders in the Rue Morgue" or "The Purloined Letter"; there is no investigation of Montresor's crime and the criminal himself explains how he committed the murder. The mystery in "The Cask of Amontillado" is in Montresor's motive for murder. Without a detective in the story, it is up to the reader to solve the mystery.[4]From the beginning of the story, it is made clear that Montresor has exaggerated his grievances towards Fortunato. The reader is led to assume that much like his exaggerated grievances, the punishment he chooses will represent what he believes is equal justice, and in turn, going to the extreme.[5]

Montresor never specifies his motive beyond the vague "thousand injuries" and "when he ventured upon insult" to which he refers. Some context is provided, including Montresor's observation that his family once was great (but no longer so), and Fortunato's belittling remarks about Montresor's exclusion fromFreemasonry. Many commentators conclude that, lacking significant reason, Montresor must beinsane, though even this is questionable because of the intricate details of the plot.[4]

There is also evidence that Montresor is almost as clueless about his motive for revenge as his victim.[6]In his recounting of the murder, Montresor notes, "A wrong is unredressed when retribution overtakes its redresser. It is equally unredressed when the avenger fails to make himself felt as such to him who has done the wrong". After Fortunato is chained to the wall and nearly entombed alive, Montresor merely mocks and mimics him, rather than disclosing to Fortunato the reasons behind his exacting revenge. Montresor may not have been entirely certain of the exact nature of the insults for which he expected Fortunato to atone.[6]

Additional scrutiny into the vague injuries and insults may have to do with a simple matter of Montresor's pride and not any specific words from Fortunato.[7]Montresor comes from an established family. His house had once been noble and respected, but has fallen slightly in status. Fortunato, as his name would seem to indicate, has been blessed with good fortune and wealth and is, therefore, viewed as unrefined by Montresor; however, this lack of refinement has not stopped Fortunato from surpassing Montresor in society, which could very well be the "insult" motive for Montresor's revenge.[7]

There is indication that Montresor blames his unhappiness and loss of respect and dignity within society on Fortunato.[8]It is easy to ascertain that Fortunato is a Freemason, while Montresor is not, which could be the source of Fortunato's recent ascension into upper class society. Montresor even imparts this blame to Fortunato when he states, "You are rich, respected, admired, beloved; you are happy, as once I was". This interchanging of fortunes is a suggestion that, since the names Montresor and Fortunato mirror one another, there is a psychological reciprocal identification between victim and executioner.[8]This identification reciprocity is further suggested when one takes into consideration that Montresor entombs Fortunato in the Montresor family catacombs rather than dispatching him elsewhere in the city amidst the chaos of the Carnival. It is with this converging of the two characters that one is able to see the larger symbolism of the Montresor crest – the foot steps on the serpent while the serpent forever has his fangs embedded in the heel.[8]

Upon further investigation into the true nature of character, double meaning can be derived from the Montresor crest.[6]It is the position of Montresor to view himself as the owner of the righteous foot that is crushing the insolent Fortunato serpent and his "thousand injuries" that progress into insult. A more allegoric meaning of Poe's places the actors in reverse.[6]The blind oaf Fortunato has unintentionally stepped upon the snake in the grass – the sneaky and cunning Montresor – who, as a reward for this accidental bruising, sinks his fangs deep into the heel of his offender, forever linking them in a form of mutual existence.[6]

Though Fortunato is presented as aconnoisseurof fine wine, his actions in the story make that assumption questionable. For example, Fortunato comments on another nobleman being unable to distinguish amontillado fromsherrywhen amontillado is in fact a type of sherry, and treatsDe Grave, an expensive French wine, with very little regard by drinking it in a single gulp. Because intoxication interferes with critical evaluation, and would be avoided by a connoisseur during a wine tasting, it is implied within the story that Fortunato is merely analcoholic. Under this interpretation, Fortunato's fate could also have been retribution for wasting a bottle of fine wine.[9]

Immurement, a form of imprisonment, usually for life, in which a person is placed within an enclosed space with no exit, is featured in several other works by Poe, including "The Fall of the House of Usher", "The Premature Burial", "The Black Cat", and "Berenice".

Anapocryphallegend holds that the inspiration for "The Cask of Amontillado" came from a story Poe had heard atCastle Island(South Boston),Massachusetts, when he was a private stationed atFort Independencein 1827.[10]According to this legend, he saw a monument to Lieutenant Robert Massie. Historically, Massie had been killed in a sword duel onChristmas Day1817 by Lieutenant Gustavus Drane, following a dispute during a card game.[11]The legend states other soldiers then took revenge on Drane by getting him drunk, luring him into the dungeon, chaining him to a wall, and sealing him in a vault.[12]This version of Drane's demise is false; Drane wascourtmartialledfor the killing andacquitted,[11]and lived until 1846.[13]A report of a skeleton discovered on the island may be a confused remembering of Poe's major source,Joel Headley's "A Man Built in a Wall",[14]which recounts the author's seeing animmuredskeleton in the wall of a church in Italy.[15]Headley's story includes details very similar to "The Cask of Amontillado"; in addition to walling an enemy into a hidden niche, the story details the careful placement of the bricks, the motive of revenge, and the victim's agonized moaning. Poe may have also seen similar themes inHonoré de Balzac'sLa Grande Bretèche(Democratic Review, November 1843) or his friendGeorge Lippard'sThe Quaker City, or The Monks of Monk Hall(1845).[16]Poe may have borrowed Montresor's family mottoNemo me impune lacessitfromJames Fenimore Cooper, who used the line inThe Last of the Mohicans(1826).[17]

Poe wrote his tale, however, as a response to his personal rivalThomas Dunn English. Poe and English had several confrontations, usually revolving around literary caricatures of one another. Poe thought that one of English's writings went a bit too far, and successfully sued the other man's editors at theNew York Mirrorforlibelin 1846.[18]That year, English published a revenge-based novel called1844, or, The Power of the S.F.Its plot was convoluted and difficult to follow, but made references tosecret societiesand ultimately had a main theme of revenge. It included a character named Marmaduke Hammerhead, the famous author of "The Black Crow", who uses phrases like "Nevermore" and "lost Lenore", referring to Poe's poem "The Raven". This parody of Poe was depicted as a drunkard, liar, and anabusivelover.

Poe responded with "The Cask of Amontillado", using very specific references to English's novel. In Poe's story, for example, Fortunato makes reference to the secret society ofMasons, similar to the secret society in1844, and even makes a gesture similar to one portrayed in1844(it was a signal of distress). English had also used an image of a token with a hawk grasping a snake in its claws, similar to Montresor's coat of arms bearing a foot stomping on a snake – though in this image, the snake is biting the heel. In fact, much of the scene of "The Cask of Amontillado" comes from a scene in1844that takes place in a subterranean vault. In the end, then, it is Poe who "punishes with impunity" by not taking credit for his own literary revenge and by crafting a concise tale (as opposed to a novel) with a singular effect, as he had suggested in his essay "The Philosophy of Composition".[19]

Poe may have also been inspired, at least in part, by theWashingtonian movement, a fellowship that promotedtemperance. The group was made up of reformed drinkers who tried to scare people into abstaining from alcohol. Poe may have made a promise to join the movement in 1843 after a bout of drinking with the hopes of gaining a political appointment. "The Cask of Amontillado" then may be a "dark temperance tale", meant to shock people into realizing the dangers of drinking.[20]

Poe scholar Richard P. Benton has stated his belief that "Poe's protagonist is an Englished version of theFrenchMontrésor" and has argued forcefully that Poe's model for Montresor "wasClaude de Bourdeille, comte de Montrésor(Count of Montrésor), the 17th-century political conspirator in the entourage ofKing Louis XIII's weak-willed brother,Gaston d'Orléans".[21]The "noted intriguer and memoir-writer" was first linked to "The Cask of Amontillado" by Poe scholar Burton R. Pollin.[21][22]

Further inspiration for the method of Fortunato's murder comes from the fear of live burial. During the time period of this short story some coffins were given methods of alerting the outside in the event of live entombment. Items such as bells tied to the limbs of a corpse to signal the outside were not uncommon. This theme is evident in Fortunato's costume of ajesterwith bells upon his hat, and his situation of live entombment within the catacombs.[8]

Poe may have known bricklaying through personal experience. Many periods in Poe's life lack significant biographical details, including what he did after leaving theSouthern Literary Messengerin 1837.[23]Poe biographer John H. Ingram wrote toSarah Helen Whitmanthat someone named "Allen" said that Poe worked "in the brickyard 'late in the fall of 1834'". This source has been identified as Robert T. P. Allen, a fellowWest Pointstudent during Poe's time there.[24]