An unexpected visitor called Mayerling comes in through Hercule Poirot's bedroom and collapses on the floor. The only clue to what he wants is his repeating Poirot's name and address and writing the number 4, many times. When Hastings jokingly calls it "The Mystery of the Big Four," the man begins speaking about an international crime cartel of that name. He describes the four leaders: Number 1 is a Chinese political mastermind named Li Chang Yen; Number 2 is probably American; Number 3 is a Frenchwoman; and Number 4 is known only as "the Destroyer." The man dies soon after Poirot and Hastings go off on the trail of the Big Four.

From here, the novel becomes a series of loosely connected short stories.

A multiethnic gang of four persons working towards world domination.[8]They have a secret hideaway in aquarryof theDolomites. It is owned by an Italian company which is afront companyfor Abe Ryland. The quarry conceals a vast subterranean base, hollowed out in the heart of the mountain. From there they usewirelesscommunications to transfer orders to thousands of their followers across many countries.[9]The characters comprise typicalethnicand nationalstereotypesof 1920s British fiction. They are:

These characters are described by Zemboy.[7]: 43–47Most are also described by Bunson.[5]: 24–25

Jerry Speir points out that the novel departs from the formula of theHercule Poirotseries. The novel is not set in themanor houseor arural arealike a number of its predecessors, nor do the characters represent the Britishgentry. The villains are a gang of international criminals, controlling a secret, global organization. Their goals include the so-called disintegration of humancivilization. They control an unspecified "scientific force", a weapon of some kind. Speir speculates that they could hold the secrets togravityornuclear power.[10]

Armin Risi agrees that this was to be the great case of Poirot's life, as the character himself claims that all other cases will seem tame by comparison (similar toSherlock Holmes' statement about his own confrontation withProfessor Moriarty). Poirot does not track down a murderer; he must face and expose asupranationalassociation of high-ranking personalities who are working towardsworld domination.[8]Risi sees the book as a work of secret history which was inspired by the events and causes ofWorld War Iand theOctober Revolution(the novel was presumably written in 1924 or 1925; see the biographical remark below). The basic scenario of the novel has secret powers (the Four) influencing humanity and the course of history. To Risi it seems to beAgatha Christie's warning about real-life organizations doing the same. He points out that Christie herself may not have been an objective historian. She was a member of thehigh societyin theBritish Empire. But this fact possibly gave her access to first-hand observers of world politics and the secret affairs behind them.[8]During theinterwar period, World War I and the October Revolution were still significant topics of conversation. He theorizes that Christie may have learned of organizations of conspirators active in the era, at least those active in theCity of London. There were already rumors that secret forces were planningWorld War IIor evenWorld War III.[8]

James Zemboy observes that this novel lacks the unity of plot of a proper novel. It is a series of episodes, only unified by the theme of Hercule Poirot investigating and uncovering the identity of one of thevillains. The Big Four themselves are unique characters, each one representing a personification ofevil. But Zemboy finds these characters lacking in traits to make them amusing, engaging, or personally interesting. The minor characters are not unique. They are generic messengers or information providers. John Ingles serves only to provide information on Li Chang Yen, Flossie Monro is only significant in providing a single clue, and Sonia Daviloff only serves to show Poirot the position of the chess table.[7]

Zemboy finds the book atypically boring for Christie. He believes that readers whose only exposure to her work is this novel, will be unlikely to pursue more of her books. The episodic nature of the book could have led to it being twice as long or half as long, without making any difference. The pattern of the novel is a series of dangerous encounters and failures to catch the criminals. Poirot repeatedly sets traps for the enemy. Repeatedly the enemy knows in advance and does not fall for them. On the other side, the Big Four set traps for Poirot. He evades most of them, only to find that the Four anticipated his moves as well. He does fall for some "real" traps.[7]

Jeremy Black, a historian, points out that a number of Agatha Christie's novels of theinterwar periodrecord the standard fears of affluent society in the era. She added the "paranoid" conviction of an underlyingconspiracy. This is an element present in her literary work and absent in theadaptations of Agatha Christiefor television and film.[11]

Black adds that Christie's work is, in its way, typical of the literature of the interwar period, much of which reflected a concern about foreign threats and links between domestic and international challenges. The Big Four, the characters, are positioned as the hidden cause and connecting threat between the world-wide unrest, labour disputes, and the revolutions of the period—in particular, theOctober Revolution, withVladimir LeninandLeon Trotskydescribed as their puppets. The Big Four also have advanced technology in their arsenal.[11]

Li Chang Yen is both a creature of sinisterOrientalismand an echo of an earlier literary character:Fu ManchubySax Rohmer. The character was described as "the greatest genius which the powers of evil have put on theEarthfor centuries", the foe of theBritish EmpireandBritish civilizationin general. The character combined great cruelty with advanced scientific research. InThe Mystery of Dr. Fu-Manchu(1913), the eponymous character is presented as a figure behindAnti-Westernactions inBritish Hong KongandChinese Turkestan. He is striking against Western politicians and administrators who are aware of the secretgeopoliticalimportance ofTonkin,Mongolia, andTibet, using these areas as a keyhole to the gate of theIndian Empire.[11]

Fu Manchu's agents wereomnipresenteven in England. His organization was likened to a yellow octopus with Fu Manchu as its head withdacoitsandthugsas its tentacles. These agents killed secretly, swiftly, and leaving no clue behind.[11]These were the literary predecessors of the Four and their agents.

David Suchet, who played Poirot forITVfrom 1989 to 2013, had a different suggestion as to the origins of the Big Four. He found them to be an evil counterpart ofThe Four Just Menseries byEdgar Wallace. He agrees, however, that Li Chang Yen was inspired by Fu Manchu.[12]

This novel was published a year afterThe Murder of Roger Ackroyd(1926) and was overshadowed by its predecessor.[5]

TheTimes Literary Supplementreview of the book publication struck a positive although incorrect note in its issue of 3 February 1927 when it assumed that the different style of the book from its immediate predecessor,The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, was a deliberate ploy: "M. Poirot, the Belgian detective who has figured in others of Mrs Christie's tales, is in very good form in the latest series of adventures. The device which made 'Who killed Roger Ackroyd?' (sic) such a puzzling problem for the reader of detective fiction is one that a writer cannot easily employ a second time, and indeed the present story is not so much the clearing up of a mystery as a recital of Poirot's encounters with one of those familiar groups of international crooks of almost unlimited power who seek to dominate the world." Hastings was described as "dense as ever".[13]

The New York Times Book Reviewof 2 October 1927 outlined the basics of the plot and stated"'Number Four' remains a mystery almost to the end. This, of course, makes it more difficult for the detective to guard against attack and to carry on his investigation, and it provides most of the thrills of the story."[14]

The reviewer inThe Observerof 13 February 1927 did not expect originality when reading a book dealing with the themes ofThe Big Four, but did admit that "When one opens a book and finds the name Li Chang Yen and is taken to subterranean chambers in the East End 'hung with rich Oriental silks', one fears the worst. Not that Mrs Christie gives us the worst; she is far too adroit and accomplished a hand for that. But the short, interpolated mysteries within the mystery are really much more interesting than the machinations of the 'Big Four' supermen." The conclusion of the book was "pretentious" and "fails to be impressive" and the reviewer summed up by saying, "the book has its thrills – in fact, too many of them; it seeks to make up in its details what it lacks in quality and consistency."[15]

The Scotsmanof 17 March 1927 said, "The activities of Poirot himself cannot be taken seriously, as one takes, for example, Sherlock Holmes. The book, indeed, reads more like an exaggerated parody of popular detective fiction than a serious essay in the type. But it certainly provides plenty of fun for the reader who is prepared to be amused. If that was the intention of the authoress, she has succeeded to perfection".[16]

Robert Barnard: "This thriller was cobbled together at the lowest point in Christie's life, with the help of her brother-in-law. Charity is therefore the order of the day, and is needed, for this is pretty dreadful, and (whatever one may think of him as a creation) demeaning to Poirot."[17]

The Big Fourwas released byHarperCollinsas agraphic noveladaptation on 3 December 2007, adapted and illustrated by Alain Paillou (ISBN0-00-725065-7). This was translated from the edition first published in France byEmmanuel Proust éditionsin 2006 under the title ofLes Quatre.

The novel was adapted for television withDavid Suchetas Poirot, as part of the final series ofAgatha Christie's Poirot. The film premiered on ITV on 23 October 2013 and onPBSon 27 July 2014 in the United States;[18]it also guest-starredSarah Parish,Patricia Hodge,Tom Brooke,Nicholas Burns, andSimon Lowe. Suchet's former co-starsHugh Fraser,Philip Jackson, andPauline Moranreprised their roles as Hastings, Japp, and Miss Lemon. The episode is very loosely based on the novel, considered by writerMark Gatissto be "an almost unadaptable mess".[19]