In 1920 London, demobilised soldier Tommy Beresford reunites with his childhood friend and war volunteer Prudence "Tuppence" Cowley. In passing, he mentions that he overheard a man mention the name "Jane Finn," which he finds ridiculous.  Out of work and money, they form "The Young Adventurers, Ltd".

Their first client, a Mr Whittington, makes Tuppence a suspiciously generous offer. Remembering Tommy's anecdote, when Whittington asks Tuppence her name, she gives him the alias "Jane Finn." A shocked Whittington offers her £50hush moneyand asks her to return the following day, but when she returns, the office has been suddenly closed. They decide to advertise for information about "Jane Finn," and receive two replies, from a Mr. Carter, and from Mr. Julius Hersheimmer.

Carter, who Tommy recognizes from his wartime service in British intelligence, tells them that Jane Finn is believed to have received a secret treaty from a British agent during the sinking ofRMSLusitaniain May 1915, as she wasmore likely to survive.  According to Mr. Carter, if the terms of the treaty were disclosed, it would cause the government to fall and precipitate a general strike.  Mr. Carter hires Tommy and Tuppence to find her, but Carter warns them about an enemy agent known only as "Mr Brown."

They then get in touch with Julius Hersheimmer, who turns out to be an American multimillionaire, and Jane Finn's cousin, who has come to London to find her.

Tommy and Tuppence's investigation leads them to the home of Mrs Marguerite "Rita" Vandemeyer, a woman with several powerful friends, including Whittington and Sir James Peel Edgerton,K C. Under cover, Tuppence obtains a job as Mrs Vandemeyer's maid and enlists the help of a young boy working there named Albert. Edgerton cryptically suggests that Tuppence might be better off working for someone else. This leads Tommy and Tuppence to go to Edgerton's office to ask about the remark.  When Tuppence resumes her disguise and returns to Vandemeyer's house, Vandemeyer discovers her deception, and holds her at gunpoint, until Tuppence wrests the gun away.  Tuppence offers Vandemeyer a large bribe to tell the whereabouts of Jane Finn, but she screamed and fainted after seeing Hersheimmer and Edgerton. They leave her in her bed but lock her in her room because of their fear of Mr. Brown, but when they return in the morning, Vandemeyer is found dead.

Meanwhile, Tommy follows Boris Ivanovitch, another of Rita's associates, to a house inSoho, where Tommy is taken prisoner while attempting to eavesdrop on a meeting ofBolshevistconspirators. A young French woman at the house, Annette, arranges his escape, but refuses to leave herself. Tommy returns to the Ritz and finds Tuppence.

Sir James discovers Jane Finn, who has recovered her memory after an accident. She tells them where she hid the treaty, but they find instead a message from Mr Brown. While searching for writing paper in Julius's drawer, Tommy finds a photograph of Annette. Tommy concludes that Annette is the real Jane Finn and the Jane Finn they met was a plant to stop their investigation. He gets an original copy of the telegram sent to Tuppence and sees that her destination was altered on the copy he read. Tommy and Albert proceed to the correct destination.

Hersheimmer arranges for the release of Tuppence and Annette. At Sir James's residence, Jane tells her story: after receiving the packet, she became suspicious of Mrs Vandemeyer. Jane placed blank sheets in the original packet, sealing the treaty inside magazine pages. Travelling from Ireland, she was mugged and taken to the house in Soho. Perceiving the intent of her captors, Jane faked amnesia, conversing only in French. She hid the treaty in a picture frame in her room and has maintained her role as "Annette" ever since. Tuppence suspects that Hersheimmer is Mr Brown. Sir James agrees, adding that the real Hersheimmer was killed in America and that his imposter killed Mrs Vandemeyer. They rush to Soho, recovering the treaty at the house. Sir James identifies himself as the true Mr Brown, and announces his plan to kill them, wound himself, and then blame it on the elusive Mr Brown. Julius and Tommy, who are hiding in the room, overwhelm Sir James. He commits suicide using poison concealed in his ring, the compelling evidence to persuade Mr Carter of his old friend's guilt.

Tommy’s role in solving the mystery persuades his estranged rich uncle to support him financially and make Tommy his heir. The novel ends with both Hersheimmer and Jane, and Tommy and Tuppence, engaged to marry.

Upon publication of the first book edition it was reviewed byThe Times Literary Supplementin its edition of 26 January 1922, which described it as "a whirl of thrilling adventures". It stated that the characters of Tommy and Tuppence were "refreshingly original" and praised the fact that the "identity of the arch-criminal, the elusive "Mr Brown", is cleverly concealed to the very end".[4]

The critic forThe New York Times Book Review(11 June 1922) was also impressed: "It is safe to assert that unless the reader peers into the last chapter or so of the tale, he will not know who this secret adversary is until the author chooses to reveal him." The review gave something of a backhanded compliment when it said that Christie "gives a sense of plausibility to the most preposterous situations and developments." Nevertheless it conceded that

Robert Barnarddescribed the novel as "The first and best (no extravagant compliment this) of the Tommy and Tuppence stories. It tells how the dauntless pair foils a plot to foment labour unrest and red revolution in Britain, masterminded by the man behind the Bolshevists. Good reactionary fun, if you're in that mood."[6]

Some additionalblurbsregarding the book, and used by The Bodley Head for advertising subsequent print runs, were: