Sir Oswald and Lady Coote host a party at thestately homeChimneys, which they have rented for the season. The guest list includes Gerry Wade, Jimmy Thesiger, Ronny Devereux, Bill Eversleigh, and Rupert "Pongo" Bateman. Since Wade has a bad habit of oversleeping, the others play a joke on him by placing eight alarm clocks in his room and timing them to go off at intervals. The next morning, a footman finds Wade dead in his bed, withchloralon his nightstand. Thesiger notices that one of the eight alarm clocks is missing. It is later found in a hedge.

Lord Caterham and his daughter Lady Eileen “Bundle” Brent move back into Chimneys. When Bundle drives to London to see Eversleigh, Ronny Devereux jumps out in front of her car. Before he dies, Devereux mutters "Seven Dials..." and "Tell...Jimmy Thesiger." Bundle gets his body to a doctor, who tells her that her car did not hit Devereux; he was shot.

Seven Dials turns out to be a seedynightclubandgambling denin theSeven Dialsarea of London. Bundle recognizes thedoormanas Alfred, afootmanfrom Chimneys. Alfred tells her that he left Chimneys for far higher wages offered by Mosgorovsky, owner of the club. Alfred takes Bundle into a secret room, where she hides in a cupboard and witnesses a meeting of six people wearing hoods with clock faces. They talk of the always-missing "Number Seven", and about an upcoming party at Wyvern Abbey, where a scientist called Eberhard will offer a secret formula for sale to the British Air Minister.

At the party, the formula is stolen, but retrieved by Wade's sister, and Jimmy Thesiger is shot in his right arm. Thesiger tells how he fought a man who climbed down the ivy. The next morning, Battle finds a charred left-handed glove with teeth marks in the fireplace. He theorizes that the thief threw the gun onto the lawn from the terrace and then climbed back into the house via the ivy. Bundle’s father reports that Bauer, the footman who replaced Alfred, is missing.

Thesiger rings up Bundle and Gerry Wade's sister Loraine and tells them to meet him and Eversleigh at the Seven Dials club. Bundle shows Thesiger the room where the Seven Dials meet. Loraine finds Eversleigh unconscious in the car and they take him into the club. Thesiger says that he will go for a doctor.

Someone knocks Bundle unconscious and she comes round in Eversleigh's arms. Mr Mosgorovsky takes them into the meeting of the Seven Dials, where Number Seven is revealed as Superintendent Battle. He reveals that they are a group of people doing secret service work for the government. Battle tells Bundle that the association has succeeded with their main target, an international criminal whose stock in trade is the theft of secret formulae: Jimmy Thesiger was arrested that afternoon with his accomplice, Loraine Wade. Battle explains that Thesiger killed Wade and Devereux when they got onto his track. Devereux took the eighth clock from Wade's room to see if anyone reacted to there being "seven dials". At Wyvern Abbey, Thesiger stole the formula, passed it to Loraine, then shot himself in his right arm and disposed of his left-hand glove using his teeth. Eversleigh feigned unconsciousness in the car outside the Seven Dials club. Thesiger never went for a doctor, but hid in the club, and knocked Bundle unconscious. Bundle takes Wade's place in the Seven Dials and marries Bill Eversleigh.

The review in theTimes Literary Supplementissue of 4 April 1929 was for once markedly unenthusiastic about a Christie Book: "It is a great pity that Mrs Christie should in this, as in a previous book, have deserted the methodical procedure of inquiry into a single and circumscribed crime for the romance of universal conspiracy and international rogues. These Gothic romances are not to be despised but they are so different in kind from the story of strict detection that it is unlikely for anyone to be adept in both. Mrs Christie lacks the haphazard and credulous romanticism which makes the larger canvas of more extensive crime successful. In such a performance bravura rather than precision is essential. The mystery of Seven Dials and of the secret society which met in that sinister district requires precisely such a broad treatment, but Mrs Christie gives to it that minute study which she employed so skilfully in her earlier books." The review concluded, "There is no particular reason why the masked man should be the particular person he turns out to be".[5]

The review inThe New York Times Book Reviewof 7 April 1929 began "After reading the opening chapters of this book one anticipates an unusually entertaining yarn. There are some very jolly young people in it, and the fact that they become involved in a murder mystery does not dampen their spirits to any great extent." The uncredited reviewer set up the plot regarding Gerald Wade being found dead and then said, "Thus far the story is excellent; indeed it continues to promise well until the time comes when the mystery is to be solved. Then it is seen that the author has been so keen on preventing the reader from guessing the solution that she has rather overstepped the bounds of what should be permitted to a writer of detective stories. She has held out information which the reader should have had, and, not content with scattering false clues with a lavish hand, she has carefully avoided leaving any clues pointing to the real criminal. Worst of all, the solution itself is utterly preposterous. This book is far below the standard set by Agatha Christie's earlier stories."[6]

The Scotsmanof 28 January 1929 said, "Less good in point of style than some of her earlier novels, The Seven Dials Mystery…maintains the author's reputation of ingenuity." The review went on to say that, "It is an unusual feature of this story that at the end, the reader will want to go back over the story to see if he has had a square deal from the author. On the whole he has."[4]

Robert Barnardnoted that this novel had the "Same characters and setting withChimneys" and then concluded his view of it by adding "but without the same verve and cheek."[7]

The first UK edition retailed at sevenshillingsandsixpence(7/6)[8]and the US edition at $2.00.[3]

In her autobiography, Christie states that this book was what she called “the light-hearted thriller type”. She went on to say that they were always easy to write as they didn’t require too much plotting or planning, presumably in contrast to the very-tightly planned detective stories. She called this era her “plutocratic” period in that she was starting to receive sums for American serialisation rights which both exceeded what she earned in the UK for such rights and was, at this time, free of income tax.[9]She compared this period favourably with the time at which she wrote these comments (1950s to 1960s) when she was plagued with income tax problems which lasted for some twenty years and ate up most of what people presumed was a large fortune.[10]

The book entered the public domain in the US on January 1st 2025.[11]

Theblurbof the first edition (which is carried on both the back of thedustjacketand opposite the title page) reads:

Following the success of their version ofWhy Didn't They Ask Evansin 1980,The Seven Dials Mysterywas adapted byLondon Weekend Televisionas a 140-minute television film and transmitted on Sunday 8 March 1981. The same team of Pat Sandys, Tony Wharmby and Jack Williams worked on the production which again starredJohn GielgudandJames Warwick.Cheryl Campbellalso starred as "Bundle" Brent. The production was extremely faithful to the book with no major deviations to the plot or characters.

This second success of adapting an Agatha Christie book led to the same company commissioningThe Secret AdversaryandAgatha Christie's Partners in Crimefor their 1983 transmission.

The production was first screened on US television as part ofMobilShowcasein April 1981.

In 2024,Netflixannounced plans foran adaptationof the novel, to be written byChris Chibnalland directed by Chris Sweeney, with Suzanne Mackie as executive producer,[13]and starringMia McKenna-Bruceas Bundle,Helena Bonham-Carteras Lady Caterham andMartin Freemanas Battle.[14]