The novel is afirst-person narrativetold from the point of view of the adolescent girl Maud Ruthyn, an heiress living with her wealthy, sombre, reclusive father Austin Ruthyn in their mansion at Knowl. Through her father and her worldly, cheerful cousin, Lady Monica Knollys, she gradually learns more regarding her uncle, Silas Ruthyn, ablack sheepof the family whom she has never met; once an infamousrakeand gambler, he is now apparently a fervently reformed Christian. His reputation has been tainted by the suspicioussuicideof a man to whom Silas owed an enormous gambling debt, which took place within a locked, apparently impenetrable room in Silas's mansion at Bartram-Haugh.

In the first part of the novel, Maud's father hires a Frenchgoverness, Madame de la Rougierre, as a companion for her. Madame terrifies Maud and appears to have designs on her: during two of their walks together, Maud is brought into suspicious contact with strangers that seem to be known to Madame. (In a cutaway scene that breaks the first-person narrative, we learn that she is in league with Silas's good-for-nothing son Dudley.) The governess is eventually dismissed when she is discovered by Maud in the act of searching her father's locked desk.

Maud is asked in obscure terms by her father, aSwedenborgian, if she is willing to undergo some kind of "ordeal" to clear the name of her uncle, and of the family more generally; shortly after she assents, her father dies from a rupturedaneurysm. At the reading of hiswill, it emerges that he had added acodicilto it so that Maud will live with Silas, who becomes her guardian until she comes of age. However, the will allows that, if she were to die whilst still a minor, the estate would then pass to Silas. Lady Knollys, together with Austin'sexecutorand fellow Swedenborgian, Dr. Bryerly, attempts in vain to overturn the codicil, realizing its dangerous implications for the young heiress; despite their efforts, Maud consents willingly to spending the next three and a half years at Bartram-Haugh.

Maud initially finds life at Bartram-Haugh strange but not unpleasant, despite ominous signs such as the uniformly unfriendly servants and Silas's malevolentfactotum, the one-legged Dickon Hawkes. Silas himself frightens Maud but is nonetheless seemingly kind to her, in contrast to his treatment of his own children, the loutish Dudley and the uneducated Millicent ('Milly'). Although Maud initially deprecates Millicent's rustic manners they become best friends, and each other's only source of companionship at the estate. During her stay, Maud is subject to various attempts by her cousin Dudley to court her, but she rejects him thoroughly on each occasion. Silas is periodically subject to mysteriouscatatonicfits, attributed to his massive consumption oflaudanum.

Various ominous happenings begin to take place at Bartram-Haugh, and it becomes increasingly difficult for Maud and Millicent to find any way out of the estate. Meanwhile, Dudley's courtship culminates in a marriage proposal to Maud; when she complains to Silas about it, he attempts to coax her into accepting. She is relieved when it is discovered that Dudley isalready married, and after being disowned by his father, he and his wife leave to set sail to Australia. Silas decides that Millicent should attend a boarding school in France, and sends her away with the promise that Maud is to join her after three months.

Maud is shocked to discover Madame de la Rougierre is residing at Bartram-Haugh in the employ of Silas, and suspects also that Dudley may not have left the country. Despite Maud's strong protests, Madame is charged with accompanying her first toLondon, and then on toDoverand across theEnglish Channel. After falling asleep during the journey and being escorted under the cover of darkness, Maud awakes to find herself again at Bartram-Haugh: she had in fact been on a round trip to London and back. Maud finds herself now imprisoned in one of the mansion's many bedrooms under the guard of Madame, whilst everyone believes she is in France.

Remembering the earlier warnings of Meg Hawkes, Maud refuses to drink anything offered to her; instead, Madame, ignorant of Silas's true intentions, drinks druggedclaretintended for Maud and promptly falls asleep on Maud's bed. Later that night, Dudley scales the building and enters the unlit room, which is the one in which the supposed suicide took place; the window he uses is set upon concealed hinges that allow it to be opened only from the outside. Hidden out of sight, Maud witnesses Dudley brutally murder Madame in the near-darkness, mistaking her for Maud. Silas enters the room, having been waiting outside; as he does this, Maud slips out undetected. Assisted by Dickon's daughter, whom Maud had befriended during her stay, she is swiftly conveyed by carriage to Lady Knollys's estate, and away from Bartram-Haugh.

Silas is discovered in the morning lying dead of a laudanumoverdose, while Dudley becomes a fugitive and is thought to be hiding in Australia. Maud is happily married to the charming and handsome Lord Ilbury and ends her recollections on a philosophical note:

Uncle Silasremains Le Fanu's best-known novel. It was the source forArthur Conan Doyle'sThe Firm of Girdlestone,[2]and remains a touchstone for contemporary mystery fiction. There are also strong connections betweenUncle Silasand some ofWilkie Collins' novels, especiallyThe Woman in White; both writers, while recognisably within the Gothic tradition, depict heroines who are far more highly developed than the persecuted maidens ofAnn Radcliffeand others.[3]

A film version, also titledUncle Silas(though initially released in the United States asThe Inheritance), was made byGainsborough Studiosin 1947. It was directed by Charles Frank, withDerrick De Marneyas Silas  andJean Simmonsas the heroine (whose given name was changed from Maud to Carolyn).[4]

A feature-length British television adaptation was made for theThames TelevisionseriesMystery and Imagination(1968). Maud was played byLucy FlemingwithRobert Eddisonas Silas.[5]

In 1977 a West German seriesUncle Silaswas produced featuringHannes Messemerin the title role.

The Dark Angel, a further adaptation starringPeter O'Tooleas Silas, premiered on BBC Television in 1989,[6]and was broadcast onPBSin the US on 21 March 1991.[7][8]

In October 2021, principal photography began on an adaptation financed byFís Éireann/Screen Ireland. It is being directed by Lisa Mulcahy, withAgnes O'Caseyas Maud andDavid Wilmotas Silas.[9]It was released in 2023 under the titleLies We Tell.

The BBC has also broadcast radio adaptations of the novel, including: