The book tells of Black's experiences in thehobounderworld, freight-hopping around the western United States and Canada, with the majority of events taking place from the late 1880s to around 1910. He tells of becoming a thief, burglar, and member of theyegg(safe-cracking) subculture, exploring the topics of crime, criminal justice, vice, addictions,penology, and human folly from various viewpoints, from observer to consumer to supplier, and from victim to perpetrator.

You Can't Winoriginally appeared in serial format in theSan Francisco Call-Bulletinunder the editorship ofFremont Older.[1]It was so popular that it was reissued in book format byMacMillanand became a best-seller.[1]It has been translated into Russian, Swedish, French, and other languages.[1]

After the book's publication, Black spent several years lecturing at women's clubs and lived in New York. Black spent his summers in a cabin on Older's property in California, next to a pool.[1]When MacMillan asked Black to write another book, he was too weak even to swim, according to Older.[1]He didn't write another book.

The main criminal activity described in Black's life and in the book is thievery, which leads to discussions of various technical aspects of the thief's "trade", including casing of prospects (surveillance of targets),safe-cracking,fencingof stolen goods, the disposal of evidence, maintaining aliases and avoiding attention or traceability, the social networks of criminals, the experiences of being arrested, questioned, and tried, and the experience of doing time in jails and prisons.

The vices and addictions Black discusses include alcoholism, abuse of opium (hop), gambling, prostitution, and stealing. In his own telling, Black does not seem to have an especial weakness for addictions (for example, he did not become alcoholic himself), but he does describe the addictive allure that gambling and opium held for him in various stages of his life. He expresses an opinion that drug addiction is more psychological than physical; nevertheless, he also admits that breaking himself of a daily opium habit was the toughest battle of his life.

Themes that Black explores through anecdotes from his life include:

William S. Burroughsfirst read the book as an adolescent and citedYou Can't Winas influential in his life and writing, mentioning the autobiography in his 1953 bookJunkie.[2]He wrote a foreword to the 1988 edition ofYou Can't Winwhich was reprinted in the 2000 edition.

The book has been adapted to a film titledYou Can't Win(in post-production as of January 2020) starringJulia Garner,Jeremy Allen WhiteandMichael Pitt, who co-produced and co-wrote the screenplay.[3][4]