Hank Morgan, a 19th-century resident ofEast Hartford,Connecticut, after a blow to the head, awakens to find himself inexplicably transported back in time toearly medieval England, where he meets King Arthur.

Many passages are quoted directly from SirThomas Malory'sLe Morte d'Arthur, a late medieval collection of Arthurian legends that constitutes one of the main sources on the myth of King Arthur andCamelot. The frame narrator is a 19th-century man (ostensibly Mark Twain himself) who meets Hank Morgan in modern times and begins reading Hank's book in the museum in which they both meet. Later, characters in the story retell parts of it in Malory's original language. A chapter on medieval hermits also draws from the work ofWilliam Edward Hartpole Lecky.

The story begins as afirst-person narrativeinWarwick Castle, where a man details his recollection of a tale told to him by an "interested stranger" who is personified as a knight through his simple language and familiarity with ancient armor.

After a brief tale ofSir LancelotofCamelotand his role in slaying two giants from thethird-person narrative, taken directly fromLe Morte d'Arthur, Hank Morgan enters and is persuaded to reveal more of his story. Hank is a superintendent because of his proficiency in firearms manufacturing, with 2,000 subordinates. During a disagreement with his subordinates, he sustains a head injury when a man named "Hercules" hits him with a crowbar.

Hank wakes up underneath an oak tree, having no idea how he got there. Hank soon encounters the knightSir Kay. Kay challenges him to ajoust, which is quickly lost by the unweaponed, unarmored Hank as he scuttles up a tree. Kay captures Hank and leads him towards Camelot Castle. Upon recognizing that he has traveled back to the 6th century, Hank realizes that he is the de facto smartest person on Earth and that with his knowledge, he should soon be running things.

Hank is ridiculed at King Arthur's court for his strange appearance and dress and is sentenced by them, particularly the magicianMerlin, to burn at the stake on June 21. By a stroke of luck, the date coincides with a historicalsolar eclipsein 528, of which Hank had learned in his earlier life. In prison, he sends the boy whom he christens Clarence (whose real name isAmyas le Poulet) to inform the king that he will blot out the sun if he is executed. Hank believes it is June 20; however, it is actually the 21st when he makes his threat, the day that the eclipse will occur at 12:03 p.m. When the king decides to burn him, the eclipse catches Hank by surprise. However, he quickly convinces the people that he caused it. He makes a bargain with the king, is released, and becomes the second most powerful person in the kingdom. (Twain may have drawn inspiration for that part of the story from a historical incident in whichChristopher Columbus exploited foreknowledge of a lunar eclipse.)

Hank is given the position of principal minister to the king and is treated by all with the utmost fear and awe. He proclaims that his only income will be taken as a percentage of any increase in the kingdom'sgross national product, from his efforts as Arthur's chief minister.

Hank learns about medieval practices and superstitions. With his superior knowledge, he is able to outdo alleged sorcerers and miracle-working church officials. At one point, soon after the eclipse, people begin gathering, hoping to see Hank perform another miracle. Merlin, jealous of Hank having replaced him as both the king's principal adviser and the most powerful sorcerer of the realm, begins spreading rumors that Hank is a fake. Hank secretly manufactures gunpowder and a lightning rod, plants explosive charges in Merlin's tower, places the lightning rod at the top, and runs a wire to the explosive charges. He then announces (when storms are frequent) that he will soon call down fire from heaven and destroy Merlin's tower, challenging Merlin to use his sorcery to prevent it. Lightning strikes the rod, triggering the explosive charges and leveling the tower, further diminishing Merlin's reputation.

Hank Morgan uses his authority and knowledge to industrialize the country behind the backs of the rest of the ruling class. His assistant is Clarence, a young boy he meets at court, whom he educates, gradually lets in on most of his secrets, and eventually comes to rely on heavily. Hank sets up secret schools, which teach modern ideas and modern English, thereby removing the new generation from medieval concepts, and secretly constructs hidden factories, which produce modern tools and weapons. He carefully selects the individuals he allows to enter his factories and schools.

As Hank gradually adjusts to his new situation, he begins to attend medieval tournaments. A misunderstanding causesSir Sagramoreto challenge him to a duel to the death. The combat will take place when Sagramore returns from his quest for theHoly Grail. Hank accepts and spends the next few years building up 19th-century infrastructure behind the nobility's back. He then undertakes an adventure with a wandering girl named the Demoiselle Alisande a la Carteloise, nicknamed "Sandy" by Hank, to save her royal "mistresses" held captive by ogres. On the way, Hank encountersMorgan le Fay. The "princesses", "ogres", and "castles" are all revealed to actually be pigs owned by peasant swineherds, but to Sandy, they still appear as royalty. Hank buys the pigs from the peasants, and the two leave.

On the way back to Camelot, they find a traveling group of pilgrims headed for the Valley of Holiness. Another group of pilgrims, however, comes from that direction and bears the news that the valley's famous fountain has run dry. According to legend, long ago, the fountain had gone dry as soon as the monks of the valley's monastery built a bath with it. The bath was destroyed and the water instantly returned, but this time, it has stopped with no clear cause. Hank is begged to restore the fountain, although Merlin is already trying to do so. When Merlin fails, he claims that the fountain has been corrupted by a demon and that it will never flow again. Hank procures assistants from Camelot, who bring along a pump and fireworks for special effects. They repair the fountain and Hank "banishes" the demon. The fountain restored, Hank goes on to debunk another magician who claims to be able to tell what any person in the world is doing, including King Arthur. However, Hank knows via telephone that the king is riding out to see the restored fountain and not "resting from the chase" as the "false prophet" had claimed. Hank correctly states that the king will arrive in the valley.

Hank has an idea to travel among the poor disguised as a peasant to find out how they truly live. King Arthur joins him but has extreme difficulty in acting like a peasant convincingly. Arthur becomes somewhat disillusioned by seeing for himself the standard of life of his subjects. The two encounter villagers in a minor fiefdom of Arthur's realm, where Arthur is taken as a madman when he makes several outlandish and erroneous comments about agriculture. Hank attempts to teach the villagers about a rudimentary value theory of wages that they rebuff and in his zeal to win the argument, accidentally acknowledges that a member of his audience overpaid a worker, a capital offense. The audience then forms a mob that chases Hank and Arthur down. They seem to be delivered from danger when a nobleman invites them into his entourage, but he enslaves them and sells them to another particularly ruthless enslaver, who takes them to London.

Hank steals a piece of metal in London and uses it to create a makeshiftlockpick. However, before he can free the king, a man enters their quarters in the dark. Mistaking him for the slave driver, Hank starts a fight with him. They are both arrested. Hank lies his way out, but in his absence, the real slave driver has discovered Hank's escape. Since Hank was the most valuable slave, he was due to be sold the next day. The man becomes enraged and begins beating his other slaves, who fight back and kill him. All the slaves, including the king, will be hanged as soon as Hank is found. Hank is captured, but he and Arthur are rescued by a party of knights led byLancelot, riding bicycles. Then, the king becomes extremely bitter against slavery and vows to abolish it when they get free, much to Hank's delight.

Sagramore returns from his quest and fights Hank, who defeats him and seven others, including Galahad and Lancelot, using a lasso. When Merlin steals Hank's lasso, Sagramore returns to challenge him again. This time, Hank kills him with a revolver. He proceeds to challenge the knights of Britain to attack him en masse, which they do. After he kills nine more knights with his revolvers, the rest break and flee. The next day, Hank reveals his 19th-century infrastructure to the country.

Three years later, Hank has married Sandy, and they have a baby. When the child falls critically ill, Hank's doctors advise him to take his family overseas while the baby recovers. In reality, it is a ploy by the Catholic Church to get Hank out of the country. During the weeks that Hank is absent, Arthur discoversGuinevere's infidelity with Lancelot. That causes a war between Lancelot and Arthur, who is eventually killed bySir Mordred.

The Church then places the land underinterdict, causing the people to revolt against Hank. Hank sees that something is wrong and returns to Britain. Clarence informs him of the war. As time goes on, Clarence gathers 52 teenage cadets, who are to fight against all of Britain. Hank's band fortifies itself in Merlin's Cave with a minefield,electric wire, andGatling guns. The Church sends an army of 30,000 knights to attack them, but they are slaughtered by the cadets.

However, Hank's men are now trapped in the cave by a wall of dead bodies and sickened by themiasmabred by thousands of corpses. Hank attempts to offer aid to any wounded but is stabbed by the first wounded man he tries to help, SirMeliagraunce. He is not seriously injured but is bedridden. Disease begins to set in. One night, Clarence finds Merlin weaving a spell over Hank, proclaiming that he will sleep for 1,300 years. Merlin begins laughing deliriously but ends up electrocuting himself on one of the electric wires. Clarence and the others all apparently die from disease in the cave.

More than a millennium later, the narrator finishes the manuscript and finds Hank on his deathbed and dreaming about Sandy. He attempts to make one last "effect" but dies before he can finish it.

Twain's first encounter with theMorte d'Arthuroccurred in 1880, when someone in his household boughtSidney Lanier'sbowdlerizededition,The Boy's King Arthur.[3]Whether he read this children's version or not is not known. However, he certainly read the unexpurgated work after his close friendGeorge Washington Cablerecommended it to him in November 1884. The pair were traveling on the lecture circuit as the "Twins of Genius" during the winter of 1884–1885 when Cable spotted theMorteon the front table of aRochester,New York, bookstore that both were perusing. Cable pointed to the volume and said, "You will never lay it down until you have read it cover to cover."[4]Twain bought this copy and read it in nearly one sitting during a train ride to their next lecture date. After his own book's great success, Twain credited Cable for his inspiration, referring to him as "the Godfather of my book".[4]

Soon thereafter, in December 1884, Twain conceived of the idea behindA Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Courtand worked on its realization between 1885 and 1889.[5]The bulk of its composition was done at Twain's summer home atElmira, New York, and was completed inHartford, Connecticut.[6]It was first published in England byChatto & Windusunder the titleA Yankee at the Court of King Arthurin December 1889.[7]

Writer and criticWilliam Dean Howellscalled it Twain's best work and "an object-lesson in democracy".[8]The work was met with some indignation in Great Britain, where it was perceived as "a direct attack on [its] hereditary and aristocratic institutions".[6]

The book pokes fun at contemporary society, but the main thrust is asatireof romanticized ideas ofchivalryand the idealization of theMiddle Agescommon in the novels ofSir Walter Scottand other 19th-century literature. Twain had a particular dislike for Scott, blaming his kind of romanticizing of battle for theSouthern states' deciding to fight theAmerican Civil War. He writes inLife on the Mississippi:

For example, the book portrays the medieval people as being very gullible, as when Merlin makes a "veil of invisibility" that, according to him, will make the wearer imperceptible to his enemies, though friends can still see him. The knight SirSagramorwears it to fight Hank, who pretends that he cannot see Sagramor for effect to the audience.

Hank Morgan's opinions are also strongly denunciatory toward theCatholic Churchof the medieval period; the Church is seen by the Yankee as an oppressive institution that stiflesscienceand teaches peasantsmeeknessonly as a means of preventing the overthrow of Church rule and taxation. The book also contains many depictions and condemnations of the dangers ofsuperstitionand the horrors ofslavery.

The book provides evidence of Twain's growing interest inGeorgisteconomics and social theory.[10]This is particularly evident in the interpretative illustrations by Georgist activistDaniel Carter Beard. Twain approved each illustration, and the editors ofThe Mark Twain Encyclopediaconsidered the illustrations an essential part of the work.[11]

George Orwellstrongly disapproved of the book: "[Twain] squandered his time on boffooneries [such as]A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court, which is a deliberate flattery of all that is worst and most vulgar in American Life" (e.g., the various American inventions and institutions Hank Morgan introduces into sixth-century Britain and whose excellence and superiority are taken for granted).[12]

It is possible to see the book as an important transitional work for Twain in that earlier, sunnier passages recall the frontier humor of his tall tales such asThe Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County, while the corrosive view of human behavior in the apocalyptic latter chapters is more akin to darker, later Twain works such asThe Mysterious StrangerandLetters from the Earth.

George Hardy notes, "The final scenes of 'Connecticut Yankee' depict massed cavalry attempting to storm a position defended by wire and machine guns—and getting massacred, none reaching their objective. Deduct the fantasy anachronism of the assailants being Medieval knights, and you get a chillingly accurate prediction of a typicalFirst World Warbattle.... The modern soldiers of 1914 with their bayonets had no more chance to win such a fight than Twain's knights."[13]

One frequently overlooked aspect of the book is the emotional intensity felt by Hank toward his family:[original research?]wife Sandy and baby Hello-Central.  Twain's own son, Langdon, died of diphtheria at the age of 19 months, which was likely reflected in Hello-Central's membranous croup. Twain also outlived two of his three daughters, but they both died after the completion of the book. The last chapters of the book are full of Hank's pronouncements of love, culminating in his final delirium, where "an abyss of thirteen centuries yawning between me and you!" is worse than death.[2]

WhileConnecticut Yankeeis sometimes credited as the foundational work in thetime travelsubgenre ofscience fiction, Twain's novel had several important immediate predecessors. Among them areH. G. Wells's story "The Chronic Argonauts" (1888), which was a precursor toThe Time Machine(1895). Also published the year beforeConnecticut YankeewasEdward Bellamy's wildly popularLooking Backward(1888), in which the protagonist is put into a hypnosis-induced sleep and wakes up in the year 2000. Yet another American novel that could have served as a more direct inspiration to Twain wasThe Fortunate Island(1882) byCharles Heber Clark. In this novel, a technically proficient American is shipwrecked on an island that broke off from Britain during Arthurian times and never developed any further.[14]

Twain's book introduced what remains one of the main literary devices used in time travel literature—a modern person is suddenly hurled into the past by some force completely beyond the traveler's control, is stuck there irrevocably, and must make the best of it—typically by trying to introduce modern inventions and institutions into the past society. Several works considered classics of science fiction clearly follow on this pattern set by Twain, such asL. Sprague de Camp'sLest Darkness FallandPoul Anderson's "The Man Who Came Early". This strand of time travel literature is clearly distinct from that following the basic pattern of Wells's works, where the protagonist is in possession of a time machine and is able to travel at will back and forth in time. The literary device continues to see use throughout modern science fiction, from popular American time travel stories such asMichael Crichton'sTimelineto JapaneseIsekailikeHandyman Saitō in Another World.[15]