Candidecontains thirtyepisodicchapters, which may be grouped into two main schemes: one consists of two divisions, separated by the protagonist'shiatusinEl Dorado; the other consists of three parts, each defined by its geographical setting. By the former scheme, the first half ofCandideconstitutes therising actionand the last part the resolution. This view is supported by the strong theme of travel and quest, reminiscent of adventure andpicaresquenovels, which tend to employ such adramatic structure.[45]By the latter scheme, the thirty chapters may be grouped into three parts each comprising ten chapters and defined by locale: I–X are set in Europe, XI–XX are set in theAmericas, and XXI–XXX are set in Europe and theOttoman Empire.[46][47]The plot summary that follows uses this second format and includes Voltaire's additions of 1761.

The tale ofCandidebegins in the castle of the Baron Thunder-ten-Tronckh inWestphalia, home to the Baron's daughter, Lady Cunégonde; hisbastardnephew, Candide; a tutor, Pangloss; achambermaid, Paquette; and the rest of the Baron's family. Theprotagonist, Candide, is romantically attracted to Cunégonde. He is a young man of "the most unaffected simplicity" (l'esprit le plus simple), whose face is "the true index of his mind" (sa physionomie annonçait son âme).[2]Dr. Pangloss, professor of "métaphysico-théologo-cosmolonigologie" (English: "metaphysico-theologo-cosmolonigology") and self-proclaimed optimist, teaches his pupils that they live in the "best of all possible worlds" and that "all is for the best".

All is well in the castle until Cunégonde sees Pangloss sexually engaged with Paquette in some bushes. Encouraged by this show of affection, Cunégonde drops her handkerchief next to Candide, enticing him to kiss her. For this infraction, Candide is evicted from the castle, at which point he is captured byBulgar(Prussian) recruiters and coerced into military service, where he isflogged, nearlyexecuted, and forced to participate in a major battle between the Bulgars and the Avars (anallegoryrepresenting the Prussians and the French). Candide eventually escapes the army and makes his way to Holland where he is given aid by Jacques, anAnabaptist, who strengthens Candide's optimism. Soon after, Candide finds his master Pangloss, now a beggar withsyphilis. Pangloss reveals he was infected with this disease by Paquette and shocks Candide by relating how Castle Thunder-ten-Tronckh was destroyed by Bulgars, that Cunégonde and her whole family were killed, and that Cunégonde wasrapedbefore her death. Pangloss is cured of his illness by Jacques, losing one eye and one ear in the process, and the three set sail toLisbon.

In Lisbon's harbor, they are overtaken by a vicious storm which destroys the boat. Jacques attempts to save a sailor, and in the process is thrown overboard.[48]The sailor makes no move to help the drowning Jacques, and Candide is in a state of despair until Pangloss explains to him that Lisbon harbor was created in order for Jacques to drown. Only Pangloss, Candide, and the "brutish sailor" who let Jacques drown[49]survive the wreck and reach Lisbon, which is promptly hit byan earthquake, tsunami, and firethat kill tens of thousands. The sailor leaves in order to loot the rubble while Candide, injured and begging for help, is lectured on the optimistic view of the situation by Pangloss.

The next day, Pangloss discusses his optimistic philosophy with a member of thePortuguese Inquisition, and he and Candide are arrested for heresy, set to be tortured and killed in an "auto-da-fé" set up to appease God and prevent another disaster. Candide is flogged and sees Pangloss hanged, but another earthquake intervenes and he escapes. He is approached by an old woman,[50]who leads him to a house where Lady Cunégonde waits, alive. Candide is surprised: Pangloss had told him that Cunégonde had been raped anddisemboweled. She had been, but Cunégonde points out that people survive such things. However, her rescuer sold her to a Jewish merchant, Don Issachar, who was then threatened by a corruptGrand Inquisitorinto sharing her (Don Issachar gets Cunégonde on Mondays, Wednesdays, and thesabbath day). Her owners arrive, find her with another man, and Candide kills them both. Candide and the two women flee the city, heading to the Americas.[51]Along the way, Cunégonde falls into self-pity, complaining of all the misfortunes that have befallen her.

The old woman reciprocates by revealing her own tragic life: born the daughter ofPope Urban Xand the Princess ofPalestrina, she was kidnapped and enslaved byBarbary pirates, witnessed violent civil wars inMoroccounder the bloodthirsty kingMoulay Ismaïl(during which her mother wasdrawn and quartered), suffered constant hunger, nearly died from aplagueinAlgiers, and had a buttock cut off to feed starvingJanissariesduring theRussian capture of Azov. After traversing all theRussian Empire, she eventually became a servant of Don Issachar and met Cunégonde.

The trio arrives inBuenos Aires, where Governor Don Fernando d'Ibarra y Figueroa y Mascarenes y Lampourdos y Souza asks to marry Cunégonde. Just then, analcalde(a Spanish magistrate) arrives, pursuing Candide for killing the Grand Inquisitor. Leaving the women behind, Candide flees toParaguaywith his practical and heretofore unmentioned manservant, Cacambo.

At aborder poston the way to Paraguay, Cacambo and Candide speak to thecommandant, who turns out to be Cunégonde's unnamed brother. He explains that after his family was slaughtered, theJesuits' preparation for his burial revived him, and he has since joined the order.[51]When Candide proclaims he intends to marry Cunégonde, her brother attacks him, and Candide runs him through with hisrapier. After lamenting all the people (mainly priests) he has killed, he and Cacambo flee. In their flight, Candide and Cacambo come across two naked women being chased and bitten by a pair of monkeys. Candide, seeking to protect the women, shoots and kills the monkeys, but is informed by Cacambo that the monkeys and women were probably lovers.

Cacambo and Candide are captured by Oreillons, or Orejones; members of theIncanobility who widened the lobes of their ears, and are depicted here as the fictional inhabitants of the area. Mistaking Candide for a Jesuit by his robes, the Oreillons prepare to cook Candide and Cacambo; however, Cacambo convinces the Oreillons that Candide killed a Jesuit to procure the robe. Cacambo and Candide are released and travel for a month on foot and then down a river by canoe, living on fruits and berries.[52]

After a few more adventures, Candide and Cacambo wander intoEl Dorado, a geographically isolatedutopiawhere the streets are covered with precious stones, there exist no priests, and all of the king's jokes are funny.[53]Candide and Cacambo stay a month in El Dorado, but Candide is still in pain without Cunégonde, and expresses to the king his wish to leave. The king points out that this is a foolish idea, but generously helps them do so. The pair continue their journey, now accompanied by one hundred red pack sheep carrying provisions and incredible sums of money, which they slowly lose or have stolen over the next few adventures.

Candide and Cacambo eventually reachSurinamewhere they split up: Cacambo travels to Buenos Aires to retrieve Lady Cunégonde, while Candide prepares to travel to Europe to await the two. Candide's remaining sheep are stolen, and Candide is fined heavily by a Dutch magistrate for petulance over the theft. Before leaving Suriname, Candide feels in need of companionship, so he interviews a number of local men who have been through various ill-fortunes and settles on a man named Martin.

This companion, Martin, is aManichaeanscholarbased on the real-life pessimistPierre Bayle, who was a chief opponent of Leibniz.[54]For the remainder of the voyage, Martin and Candide argue about philosophy, Martin painting the entire world as occupied by fools. Candide, however, remains an optimist at heart, since it is all he knows. After a detour toBordeauxandParis, they arrive in England and see an admiral (based onAdmiral Byng) being shot for not killing enough of the enemy. Martin explains that Britain finds it necessary to shoot an admiral from time to time "pour encourager les autres" (to encourage the others).[55]Candide, horrified, arranges for them to leave Britain immediately. Upon their arrival inVenice, Candide and Martin meet Paquette, the chambermaid who infected Pangloss with his syphilis. She is now a prostitute, and is spending her time with aTheatinemonk, Brother Giroflée. Although both appear happy on the surface, they reveal their despair: Paquette has led a miserable existence as a sexual object since she was forced to become a prostitute, and the monk detests the religious order in which he was indoctrinated. Candide gives two thousandpiastresto Paquette and one thousand to Brother Giroflée.

Candide and Martin visit the Lord Pococurante, a noble Venetian. That evening, Cacambo—now a slave—arrives and informs Candide that Cunégonde is inConstantinople. Prior to their departure, Candide and Martin dine with six strangers who had come for theCarnival of Venice. These strangers are revealed to be dethroned kings: the Ottoman SultanAhmed III, EmperorIvan VI of Russia,Charles Edward Stuart(an unsuccessful pretender to the English throne),Augustus III of Poland(deprived, at the time of writing, of his reign in theElectorate of Saxonydue to theSeven Years' War),Stanisław Leszczyński, andTheodore of Corsica.

On the way to Constantinople, Cacambo reveals that Cunégonde—now horribly ugly—currently washes dishes on the banks of thePropontisas a slave for a fugitiveTransylvanianprince by the name ofRákóczi. After arriving at theBosphorus, they board agalleywhere, to Candide's surprise, he finds Pangloss and Cunégonde's brother among the rowers. Candide buys their freedom and further passage at steep prices.[51]They both relate how they survived, but despite the horrors he has been through, Pangloss's optimism remains unshaken: "I still hold to my original opinions, because, after all, I'm a philosopher, and it wouldn't be proper for me to recant, since Leibniz cannot be wrong, and sincepre-established harmonyis the most beautiful thing in the world, along with theplenumandsubtle matter."[56]

Candide, the baron, Pangloss, Martin, and Cacambo arrive at the banks of the Propontis, where they rejoin Cunégonde and the old woman. Cunégonde has indeed become hideously ugly, but Candide nevertheless buys their freedom and marries Cunégonde to spite her brother, who forbids Cunégonde from marrying anyone but a baron of the Empire (he is secretly sold back into slavery). Paquette and Brother Giroflée—having squandered their three thousand piastres—are reconciled with Candide on a small farm (une petite métairie) which he just bought with the last of his finances.

One day, the protagonists seek out adervishknown as a great philosopher of the land. Candide asks him why Man is made to suffer so, and what they all ought to do. The dervish responds by asking rhetorically why Candide is concerned about the existence of evil and good. The dervish describes human beings as mice on a ship sent by a king to Egypt; their comfort does not matter to the king. The dervish then slams his door on the group. Returning to their farm, Candide, Pangloss, and Martin meet aTurkwhose philosophy is to devote his life only to simple work and not concern himself with external affairs. He and his four children cultivate a small area of land, and the work keeps them "free of three great evils: boredom, vice, and poverty."[57]Candide, Pangloss, Martin, Cunégonde, Paquette, Cacambo, the old woman, and Brother Giroflée all set to work on this "commendable plan" (louable dessein) on their farm, each exercising his or her own talents. Candide ignores Pangloss's insistence that all turned out for the best by necessity, instead telling him "we must cultivate our garden" (il faut cultiver notre jardin).[57]

As Voltaire himself described it, the purpose ofCandidewas to "bring amusement to a small number of men of wit".[2]The author achieves this goal by combining wit with a parody of the classic adventure-romance plot. Candide is confronted with horrible events described in painstaking detail so often that it becomes humorous. Literary theorist Frances K. Barasch described Voltaire's matter-of-fact narrative as treating topics such as mass death "as coolly as a weather report".[58]The fast-paced and improbable plot—in which characters narrowly escape death repeatedly, for instance—allows for compounding tragedies to befall the same characters over and over again.[59]In the end,Candideis primarily, as described by Voltaire's biographer Ian Davidson, "short, light, rapid and humorous".[10][60]

Behind the playful façade ofCandidewhich has amused so many, there lies very harsh criticism of contemporary European civilization which angered many others. European governments such as France, Prussia, Portugal and England are each attacked ruthlessly by the author: the French and Prussians for the Seven Years' War, the Portuguese for theirInquisition, and the British for the execution ofJohn Byng. Organised religion, too, is harshly treated inCandide. For example, Voltaire mocks theJesuit orderof theRoman Catholic Church. Aldridge provides a characteristic example of such anti-clerical passages for which the work was banned: while inParaguay, Cacambo remarks, "[The Jesuits] are masters of everything, and the people have no money at all …". Here, Voltaire suggests theChristian mission in Paraguayis taking advantage of the local population. Voltaire depicts the Jesuits holding the indigenous peoples as slaves while they claim to be helping them.[61][62]

The main method ofCandide's satire is to contrast ironically great tragedy and comedy.[10]The story does not invent or exaggerate evils of the world—it displays real ones starkly, allowing Voltaire to simplify subtle philosophies and cultural traditions, highlighting their flaws.[59]ThusCandidederides optimism, for instance, with a deluge of horrible, historical (or at least plausible) events with no apparent redeeming qualities.[2][58]

A simple example of the satire ofCandideis seen in the treatment of the historic event witnessed by Candide and Martin inPortsmouthharbour. There, the duo spy an anonymous admiral, supposed to representJohn Byng, being executed for failing to properly engage a French fleet. The admiral is blindfolded and shot on the deck of his own ship, merely "to encourage the others" (French:pour encourager les autres, an expression Voltaire is credited with originating). This depiction of military punishment trivializes Byng's death. The dry, pithy explanation "to encourage the others" thus satirises a serious historical event in characteristically Voltairian fashion. For its classic wit, this phrase has become one of the more often quoted fromCandide.[10][63]

Voltaire depicts the worst of the world and his pathetic hero's desperate effort to fit it into an optimistic outlook. Almost all ofCandideis a discussion of various forms of evil: its characters rarely find even temporary respite. There is at least one notable exception: the episode ofEl Dorado, a fantastic village in which the inhabitants are simply rational, and their society is just and reasonable. The positivity of El Dorado may be contrasted with the pessimistic attitude of most of the book. Even in this case, the bliss of El Dorado is fleeting: Candide soon leaves the village to seek Cunégonde, whom he eventually marries only out of a sense of obligation.[2][58]

Another element of the satire focuses on what William F. Bottiglia, author of many published works onCandide, calls the "sentimental foibles of the age" and Voltaire's attack on them.[64]Flaws in European culture are highlighted asCandideparodies adventure and romance clichés, mimicking the style of apicaresque novel.[64][65]A number of archetypal characters thus have recognisable manifestations in Voltaire's work: Candide is supposed to be the driftingrogueof lowsocial class, Cunégonde the sex interest, Pangloss the knowledgeable mentor, and Cacambo the skillful valet.[2]As the plot unfolds, readers find that Candide is no rogue, Cunégonde becomes ugly and Pangloss is a stubborn fool. The characters ofCandideare unrealistic, two-dimensional, mechanical, and evenmarionette-like; they are simplistic and stereotypical.[66]As the initially naïve protagonist eventually comes to a mature conclusion—however noncommittal—the novella is abildungsroman, if not a very serious one.[2][67]

Gardens are thought by many critics to play a critical symbolic role inCandide. The first location commonly identified as a garden is the castle of the Baron, from which Candide and Cunégonde are evicted much in the same fashion asAdam and Eveare evicted from theGarden of Edenin theBook of Genesis. Cyclically, the main characters ofCandideconclude the novel in a garden of their own making, one which might represent celestial paradise. The third most prominent "garden" isEl Dorado, which may be a false Eden.[68]Other possibly symbolic gardens include the Jesuit pavilion, the garden of Pococurante, Cacambo's garden, and the Turk's garden.[69]

These gardens are probably references to the Garden of Eden, but it has also been proposed, by Bottiglia, for example, that the gardens refer also to theEncyclopédie, and that Candide's conclusion to cultivate "his garden" symbolises Voltaire's great support for this endeavour. Candide and his companions, as they find themselves at the end of the novella, are in a very similar position to Voltaire's tightly knit philosophical circle which supported theEncyclopédie: the main characters ofCandidelive in seclusion to "cultivate [their] garden", just as Voltaire suggested his colleagues leave society to write. In addition, there is evidence in theepistolarycorrespondence of Voltaire that he had elsewhere used the metaphor of gardening to describe writing theEncyclopédie.[69]Another interpretative possibility is that Candide cultivating "his garden" suggests his engaging in only necessary occupations, such as feeding oneself and fighting boredom. This is analogous to Voltaire's own view on gardening: he was himself a gardener at his estates inLes DélicesandFerney, and he often wrote in his correspondence that gardening was an important pastime of his own, it being an extraordinarily effective way to keep busy.[70][71][72]

Candidesatirises various philosophical and religious theories that Voltaire had previously criticised. Primary among these isLeibnizian optimism(sometimes calledPanglossianismafter its fictional proponent), which Voltaire ridicules with descriptions of seemingly endless calamity.[10]Voltaire demonstrates a variety of irredeemable evils in the world, leading many critics to contend that Voltaire's treatment of evil—specifically the theological problem of
its existence—is the focus of the work.[73]Heavily referenced in the text are the Lisbon earthquake, disease, and the sinking of ships in storms. Also, war, thievery, and murder—evils of human design—are explored as extensively inCandideas are environmental ills. Bottiglia notes Voltaire is "comprehensive" in his enumeration of the world's evils. He is unrelenting in attacking Leibnizian optimism.[74]

Fundamental to Voltaire's attack is Candide's tutor Pangloss, a self-proclaimed follower of Leibniz and a teacher of his doctrine. Ridicule of Pangloss's theories thus ridicules Leibniz himself, and Pangloss's reasoning is silly at best. For example, Pangloss's first teachings of the narrative absurdly mix up cause and effect: