Orphan Tom Sawyer (around 12 to 13 years old) lives with hisAunt Pollyand his half-brother Sid in the town ofSt. Petersburg, Missouri, sometime in the 1840s. He frequently skips school to play or go swimming. When Polly catches him sneaking home late on a Friday evening and discovers that he has been in a fight, she makes himwhitewashher fence the next day as punishment.

Tom persuades several neighborhood children to trade him smalltrinketsand treasures for the "privilege" of doing his work, usingreverse psychologyto convince them of its enjoyable nature. Later, Tom trades the trinkets with students in hisSunday schoolclass for tickets given out for memorizing verses ofScripture. He collects enough tickets to earn a prizedBiblefrom the teacher, despite being one of the worst students in the class and knowing almost nothing of Scripture, eliciting envy from the students and a mixture of pride and shock from the adults.

Tom falls in love withBecky Thatcher, a girl who is new in town. Tom wins the admiration of her father, the prominent Judge Thatcher, in the church by obtaining the Bible as a prize, but reveals his ignorance when he cannot answer basic questions about Scripture. Tom pursues Becky, eventually persuading her to get "engaged" by kissing her. Their romance soon collapses when she discovers that Tom was "engaged" to another schoolgirl,Amy Lawrence.

Becky spurns Tom, who accompaniesHuckleberry Finn, a vagrant boy whom all the other boys admire, to a graveyard at midnight to perform aritualintended to healwarts. At the graveyard, they witness threebody snatchers, Dr. Robinson, Muff Potter andInjun Joe, robbing a grave. A fight breaks out, during which Robinson knocks Potterunconsciousand is thenmurderedby Injun Joe. When Potter wakes up, Injun Joe puts the weapon in his hand and tells him that he killed Robinson while drunk. Tom and Huck swear ablood oathnot to tell anyone about the murder, fearing that Injun Joe will find out and kill them for revenge. Potter is arrested and jailed to await trial, not disputing Injun Joe's claim.

Tom grows bored with school, and he, his friend/classmate Joe Harper, and Huck run away to Jackson's Island in theMississippi Riverto begin life as "pirates". While enjoying their freedom, they notice the community is scouring the river for their bodies, as the boys are missing andpresumed dead. Tom sneaks back home one night to observe the commotion and, after a moment of remorse at his loved ones' suffering, conceives a plan to attend his ownfuneral. The three carry out this scheme, appearing atchurchin the middle of their joint funeral service and winning the respect of their classmates for the stunt. Back in school, Becky rips a page in the school master'sanatomybook after Tom startles her, but Tom regains her admiration by claiming responsibility for the damage and accepting thepunishmentthat would have been hers.

During Potter's murder trial, Tom breaks his oath with Huck andtestifiesfor the defense, identifying Injun Joe as the actual culprit. Injun Joe flees thecourtroombefore he can be apprehended; Potter isacquitted, but Tom and Huck now live in fear for their lives.

Once school lets out for the summer, Tom and Huck decide to hunt for buried treasure in the area. While investigating an abandoned house, they are interrupted by the arrival of two men; one of them is a Spaniard, supposedly deaf-mute, who is actually Injun Joe in disguise. He and his partner plan to bury some stolen treasure in the house, but inadvertently discover a hoard ofgold coinswhile doing so. They decide to move it to a new hiding place, which Tom and Huck are determined to find. One night, Huck follows the men, who plan to break into the home of the wealthyWidow Douglasso Injun Joe canmutilateher face in revenge for being publicly whipped for vagrancy − a punishment handed down by her late husband, ajustice of the peace. Huck summons help and prevents the break-in, but asks that his name not be made public for fear of retaliation by Injun Joe.

Shortly before Huck stops the crime, Tom goes on apicnicto a localcavewith Becky and their classmates. Tom and Becky become lost and wander in the cave for days, facingstarvationanddehydration. Becky becomes dehydrated and weak, and Tom's search for a way out grows more desperate. He encounters Injun Joe by chance, but is not seen. He eventually finds an exit, and he and Becky are joyfully welcomed back to town, learning that they have been missing for three days and traveled five miles (eight kilometers) from the entrance. Judge Thatcher has the cave's entrance door reinforced and locked. When Tom hears of this action two weeks later, he is horror-stricken, knowing that Injun Joe is still inside. He directs a posse to the cave, where they find Injun Joe dead of starvation just inside the entrance.

A week later, having deduced from Injun Joe's presence that the stolen gold must be hidden in the cave, Tom takes Huck there in search of it. They find the gold, which totals over$12,000(equivalent to $405,000 in 2024) and is invested on their behalf. The Widow Douglas adopts Huck, who finds the restrictions of acivilizedhome life painful, attempting to escape back to hisvagrantlife. He reluctantly returns to the widow, persuaded by Tom's offer to form a high-classrobber gang.

The novel has elements of humor, satire and social criticism – features that later madeMark Twainone of the most important authors ofAmerican literature. Mark Twain describes some autobiographical events in the book. The novel's setting of St. Petersburg is based on Twain's actual boyhood home ofHannibal, near St. Louis, and many of the places in it are real and today support a tourist industry as a result.[7]

The concept of boyhood is developed through Tom's actions, including his runaway adventure with Joe and Huckleberry. To help show how mischievous and messy boyhood was,The Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Division of Art, Prints and Photographsshows a picture of a young boy smoking a pipe, sawing furniture, climbing all over the place, and sleeping. In Twain's novel, Tom and his friend are young when they decide they want to learn how to smoke a pipe. Tom and Joe do this to show just how cool they are to the other boys.[8]

Tom Sawyerwas Twain's first attempt to write a novel. He had previously written contemporary autobiographical narratives (The Innocents Abroad or The New Pilgrims' Progress,Roughing It) and two short texts called sketches which parody the youth literature of the time. These areThe Story of the Good BoyandThe Story of the Wicked Little Boywhich are satirical texts of a few pages. In the first, a model child is never rewarded and ends up dying before he can declaim his last words which he has carefully prepared. In the second story, an evil little boy steals and lies, like Tom Sawyer, but finishes rich and successful. Tom appears as a mixture of these little boys since he is at the same time a scamp and a boy endowed with a certain generosity.

By the time he wroteTom Sawyer, Twain was already a successful author based on the popularity ofThe Innocents Abroad.He owned a large house inHartford, Connecticut, but needed another success to support himself, with a wife and two daughters. He had collaborated on a novel withCharles Dudley Warner,The Gilded Age, published in 1874.[9]

He had earlier written an unpublished memoir of his own life on the Mississippi and had corresponded with a boyhood friend, Will Bowen, both of which had evoked many memories and were used as source material.

Twain named his fictional character after a San Francisco fireman whom he met in June 1863. The real Tom Sawyer was a local hero, famous for rescuing 90 passengers after a shipwreck. The two remained friendly during Twain's three-year stay in San Francisco, often drinking and gambling together.[10]

In November 1875, Twain gave the manuscript to Elisha Bliss of theAmerican Publishing Company, who sent it toTrue Williamsfor the illustrations. A little later, Twain had the text also quickly published atChatto and Windusof London, in June 1876, but without illustration. Pirate editions appeared very quickly in Canada and Germany. The American Publishing Company finally published its edition in December 1876, which was the first illustrated edition of Tom Sawyer.[11]

Athird personnarrator describes the experiences of the boys, interspersed with occasional social commentary. In its sequel,Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Mark Twain changes to afirst person narrative.[12]The two other subsequent books,Tom Sawyer AbroadandTom Sawyer, Detective, are similarly in the first person narrative from the perspective of Huckleberry Finn.

The book has raised controversy for its use of the racial epithet "nigger"; abowdlerizedversion aroused indignation among some literary critics.[13]

The book has been criticized for its caricature-like portrayal ofNative Americansthrough the characterInjun Joe. He is depicted as malevolent for the sake of malevolence, is not allowed to redeem himself in any way by Twain, dies a pitiful and despairing death in a cave and upon his death is treated as a tourist attraction.Carter Revardsuggests that the adults in the novel blame the character's Indian blood as the cause of his evil.[14]

Tom Sawyer, the story's title character, also appears in two other uncompleted sequels:Huck and Tom Among the IndiansandTom Sawyer's Conspiracy. He is also a character in Twain's unfinishedSchoolhouse Hill.

Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Actspremiered on October 14, 2011, at theKauffman Center for the Performing ArtsinKansas City, Missouri. The score was by composerMaury Yeston, with choreography by William Whitener, artistic director of theKansas City Ballet.[36][37]A review inThe New York Timesobserved: "It’s quite likely that this is the first all-new, entirely American three-act ballet: it is based on an American literary classic, has an original score by an American composer and was given its premiere by an American choreographer and company. ... Both the score and the choreography are energetic, robust, warm, deliberately naïve (both ornery and innocent), in ways right for Twain."[38]

The Adventures of Tom Sawyerhas been adapted intocomic bookform many times:

On November 30, 2011, to celebrate Twain's 176th birthday, theGoogle Doodlewas a scene fromThe Adventures of Tom Sawyer.[41]