Down at Blandings,Lord Emsworthis dismayed to hear fromBaxterthat he is expected to travel to London to collect the poet Ralston McTodd, invited to the castle by his sisterConnie, a keen supporter of the Arts; another poet, Aileen Peavey, is already installed at the castle.

Joe Keeble tries to persuade his imperious wife to let him give money to his beloved stepdaughter Phyllis, but is bullied out of it, and when Emsworth's feckless younger sonFreddiesuggests stealing Connie's necklace to free up some cash, Keeble is taken with the idea. Freddie, not keen on doing the job himself, sees Psmith's advert in the paper, and tags along to London with Lord Emsworth.

Meanwhile, in the metropolis, we learn thatMike, having married Phyllis on the assumption that his job as estate manager for Psmith's father would be secure, found on Mr Smith's death that the old man was bankrupt, and is working as a poorly paid schoolmaster. Psmith worked for a time for an uncle in the fish business, but could stand the fish no longer and quit.

Phyllis meets some old school friends, including Eve Halliday, an assertive young girl who pities the once-rich Phyllis, believing her too soft to cope with penury. Eve, we learn, is a friend of Freddie Threepwood, and on his encouragement has taken a post cataloguing the Blandings library, while another friend, Cynthia, has been abandoned by her husband, famous poet Ralston McTodd.

Later, Psmith sees Eve sheltering from the rain opposite theDrones, and chivalrously runs out to give her the best umbrella from the club's umbrella rack. They later meet once more at an employment agency, where Psmith has come seeking work and Eve is visiting an old friend. Psmith meets up with Freddie Threepwood, who describes his scheme to steal Connie's necklace, but dashes off without revealing his name.

Soon after, Psmith runs into Lord Emsworth at theSenior Conservative Club, where the Earl is dining with Ralston McTodd. The poet is annoyed by Emsworth's absent-mindedness, especially when the old man potters across the street to inspect a flower shop, and leaves in a rage. When Emsworth returns, Emsworth mistakes Psmith for his guest, and when Psmith sees Eve Halliday meeting Lord Emsworth, he decides to visit Blandings, posing as McTodd.

Welcomed at the castle, especially by fellow poet Peavey, Psmith is nevertheless suspected by the ever-vigilant Baxter, the real McTodd havingtelegrammedto cancel his visit. Eve arrives and Psmith begins his wooing with some success, despite her belief that he is McTodd and has jilted her friend. Freddie, worried that one of the maids is a detective, is advised by Psmith to kiss her, and judge by her response whether she is a real maid; Psmith and Eve run into him just as he is embracing the girl.

One day, a stranger arrives at the house claiming to be McTodd, but Psmith turns him politely away. The man, Edward Cootes, runs into Aileen Peavey on his way back to the station, and we learn they are both crooks, estranged lovers both after the diamonds. Cootes returns to the castle, and forces Psmith to help him get in, which Psmith does, passing Cootes off as hisvalet. Psmith arranges the use of a small cottage, in case he needs to hide the jewels from Cootes.

Cootes and Peavey make a plan to steal the necklace during a poetry-reading, while Eve, having heard from Freddie that Joe Keeble plans to give him money, questions Keeble about why he isn't helping out her friend; he enlists her as a helper in the diamond-stealing plot. As Psmith begins his reading of McTodd's poems, Cootes turns off the lights and Peavey grabs the necklace, flinging it out of the window to where Eve (by coincidence) is standing; Eve hides it in a flowerpot. Returning later to fetch it, Eve wakes the vigilant Baxter, but evades him, leaving him locked out and stashing her flowerpot on a windowsill.

Baxter, locked out of the house in his lemon-colouredpyjamas, throws flowerpots through a window to awake Lord Emsworth, who assumes he is mad and calls in Psmith to help appease him. Next morning, Baxter is fired from his job, and Eve finds the flowerpot empty at Psmith's cottage. Enlisting Freddie's help, she searches the cottage, but finds nothing; Psmith enters and explains his motives, and his friendship with Mike and Phyllis. Cootes and Peavey appear, armed, and threaten to escape with the necklace, but Psmith takes advantage of Freddie's leg falling through the ceiling to overpower Cootes and retrieve the jewels.

Keeble gives Mike the funds he requires to buy his farm, and gives Freddie enough to get him into abookmakingbusiness. Psmith and Eve get engaged, and Psmith persuades Lord Emsworth to take him on as Baxter's replacement.

Wodehouse uses vivid, exaggerated imagery in similes and metaphors for comic effect. For example, in chapter 7.11: "A sound like two or three pigs feeding rather noisily in the middle of a thunderstorm interrupted his meditation".[3]

Wodehouse often uses literary references, sometimes giving the quoted passage directly with little change to the original quote, but adding to the quote to make it absurdly apposite to the situation. This occurs in chapter 11.5, after Baxter sees Psmith on the terrace of Blandings Castle:

Descriptions provided in Wodehouse's stories generally contain humorous elements, inserted into what would otherwise be pure exposition. For example, there are comic elements in the description of Aileen Peavy provided in chapter 10. To quote part of the passage: "She [Aileen Peavey] was alone. It is a sad but indisputable fact that in this imperfect world Genius is too often condemned to walk alone—if the earthier members of the community see it coming and have time to duck".[5]

Injuries in Wodehouse's stories generally do much less harm than would normally be expected in real life, being similar to the inconsequential injuries depicted in stage comedies. For instance, after Psmith wakes up Freddie Threepwood by arranging for Freddie's suitcase to fall on him, Freddie merely massages the stricken spot, gurgles wordlessly, and is soon ready to resume normal conversation.[6]

One of the prime sources of humour in Wodehouse's comic novels is the distinctive or absurd names given to characters, places, and brands of goods. One notable example is Psmith, who chooses to spell his name with a silent p "as in pshrimp" (chapter 5).[7]

One reason the novel was written was because Wodehouse's adopted daughter Leonora wanted him to write another Psmith story.[8]The book has the dedication: "To my daughter Leonora, queen of her species."[9]

The story was illustrated byMay Wilson PrestoninThe Saturday Evening Post.[10]The illustrator for theGrandserial is not stated, but the artist's signature, visible on some of the illustrations such as the first two in the first part[11]and one in the fifth part,[12]is the same as one used byA. Wallis Mills.[13]Mills's signature can also be seen on the illustrations for one of the other Wodehouse books serialised inThe Grand Magazine,The Adventures of Sally.[14]

The complete novel was included in the 1932 collectionNothing But Wodehouse.[15]It was also featured in the 1974 collectionThe World of Psmith.[16]

The story was adapted into a play, also titledLeave It to Psmith, by Wodehouse andIan Hay. It opened at theShaftesbury Theatrein London on 29 September 1930 and ran for 156 performances.[17]

The filmLeave It to Me(1933) was adapted from the 1930 play based on the novel.

Aradio dramabased on the novel was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in October 1981. Dramatised byMichael Bakewell, it featuresJohn Gielgudnarrating as P. G. Wodehouse,Michael Hordernas Lord Emsworth,Joan Greenwoodas Lady Constance,Simon Wardas Psmith, andCaroline Langrisheas Eve.[18]

A 1988 Indian television ten-episode serial titledIsi Bahane(On This Excuse) was based on the novel and aired onDD National. The serial was produced byDoordarshan.[19]

The novel was dramatised for radio by Archie Scottney, withMartin Jarvisas Lord Emsworth,Patricia Hodgeas Constance,Edward Bennettas Psmith, andSusannah Fieldingas Eve. The adaptation aired on BBC Radio 4 in May 2020.[20]