The author explains the style of the book before beginning the story with his funeral and cause of death - "Brás Cubaspoultice", a medical panacea that was his last obsession and "would guarantee him glory among men". He then goes back to his childhood.

He was a wealthy, spoiled, and wicked child. From an early age, he showed signs of a perverse nature, beating the heads of his slaves when he was not attended to in some desire or playing horse riding on the back of a young male slave named Prudêncio. At the age of seventeen, Brás Cubas falls in love with a prostitute named Marcela, an affair which lasts "fifteen months and elevencontos" and almost wipes out the family fortune.

To forget this heartbreak, the protagonist is sent toCoimbrato study law. After a few years of wild bohemianism, "following romanticism in practice and liberalism in theory," he returns to Rio de Janeiro on the occasion of the death of his mother. He falls in love with a girl named Eugênia, the daughter of Dona Eusébia, a poor friend of the family, who turns out to be lame from birth. His father plans to have a political marriage with Virgília, daughter of Conselheiro Dutra. However, Virgília prefers to marry Lobo Neves, who is also a candidate for a political career. With the death of Brás Cubas' father, conflict breaks out over the inheritance between him and his sister Sabina, and her husband Cotrim.

Virgília, now married, encounters Brás Cubas at a ball and they begin an adulterous affair. Virgília becomes pregnant but the child dies before being born. To keep the affair secret Brás Cubas bribes Virgília's former seamstress Dona Plácida to act as the resident of a small house inGamboa, which serves as a meeting place for the lovers. Cubas meets Quincas Borba, a childhood friend who has fallen on hard times. He steals Cubas' watch, later returning it to him. He introduced Cubas to his philosophical system, Humanitism.

Pursuing fame or excitement, Brás Cubas becomes a deputy. Lobo Neves is appointed governor of a province and leaves with Virgília for the north, ending the affair. Sabina finds a wife for Brás Cubas, Nhã-Loló, Cotrim's 19-year-old niece, but she dies of yellow fever and Brás Cubas becomes a confirmed bachelor. He tried unsuccessfully to become Minister of State and to found an opposition newspaper. Quincas Borba shows signs of dementia. An aging Virgília asks him to support the impoverished Dona Plácida, who then dies. Lobo Neves, Marcela and Quincas Borba also die. Eugênia falls into poverty. His last attempt at glory is the "Brás Cubas poultice", a medicine that will cure all diseases. Ironically, while going out to take care of his project, he is caught in a rainstorm and catches pneumonia, from which he dies at age sixty-four. Virgília, accompanied by her son, visits his deathbed. After dying he begins to tell the story of his life backwards, concluding that on balance his life has been slightly positive because he has not had children, and thus he has not "transmitted the legacy of misery".

Cubas considers his life in the manner of an accounting, finding neither any positives or negatives; but he then realises that since he has not fathered any children he has not passed on the "misery" of life any further. For this reason he considers his life a success. Assis published his work in 1881 and it is influenced by the philosophy ofArthur Schopenhauer, aGermanphilosopher whose philosophicalmagnum opus,The World as Will and Representationwas first published in 1818. Schopenhauer's influence on the novel's philosophy is without doubt when one compares Cubas' description of insects and his attitude towards animals, which is a feature of Schopenhauer's philosophical outlook; and in Schopenhauer's writing he similarly uses examples from the animal kingdom to illustrate a philosophical truth (most famously that of the Australianbull-ant). Assis' allusion to Schopenhauer's philosophy is also 'formal': the chapter structure ofThe Posthumous Memoirsmimics that of Schopenhauer'sWorld as Will and Representation; Bras Cubas' "method" in the novel, specifically the practice of referring to incidents in previous chapters by the chapter number, is imitative. Schopenhauer is often referred to as the 'King' of pessimists, or the 'Philosopher of despair'; his outlook is heavily linked to that ofBuddhism.

It is important to note that Assis created a philosophical theory to criticizePositivism, which was common in Brazil's literature back then. The theory in question was Humanitism, created in the books by Quincas Borba, a friend of Brás Cubas who had gone mad before dying. By doing this, Assis sharply criticizes the current philosophical theories, implying that only someone crazy would believe in them. Humanitism is to believe in Humanitas, which, according to Borba, is "the principle of the things, the same man equally distributed in all men". Therefore, if all men are equally Humanitas, an executioner killing a convict of murder is just "Humanitas correcting Humanitas because of an infraction of the laws of Humanitas". Envy is just "an admiration that fights for Humanitas against Humanitas", and thus, "war being the grand function of humankind, all the pugnacious feelings are the most adequate to happiness. From this, I came to the conclusion: envy is a virtue". If envy is a virtue, then cynicism, vanity and egoism are legitimated. Assis, through an ingenious fallacy, implied that envy is positive, in the same way many theories could "prove" true something clearly absurd looking through today's eyes.

In an article in The Guardian,Woody Allenlisted the work as one of his favorites. He said in an interview with the newspaper:

In the New York Times,Parul Sehgalpraised the book new release with a new translation, also praising its irony and charm, while asking the readers "Is it possible that the most modern, most startlingly avant-garde novel to appear this year was originally published in 1881?".[3]In the same 2020 release,Dave Eggersfrom The New Yorker defined the book as "one of the wittiest, most playful, and therefore most alive and ageless books ever written".[4]

There have been multiple translations. It was first translated into English in 1952 asEpitaph of a Small Winnerby William L. Grossman.[5]In 1997, it was translated asThe Posthumous Memoirs of Brás CubasbyGregory Rabassa.[6]In 2020, there were two new translations, by Flora Thomson-DeVeaux (Penguin Classics) andMargaret Jull Costaand Robin Patterson (Liveright). TheNew York Timesnamed Jull Costa and Patterson's translation "the superior translation" (Parul Sehgal,The New York Times).[7]