Emmeline Lucas is the social queen of Riseholme, presiding over her community and directing their interests in art and culture. A pretentious show-off,La Luciadrops random Italian phrases into her speech, gives concerts to her friends of the first movement ofBeethoven'sMoonlight Sonata, dabbles in art, and plantsShakespeare-themed flower arrangements in her garden. Her neighbor, devotedfaddistDaisy Quantock, has given up her uric-acid-free diet andChristian Scienceto focus on Indian mysticism, thanks to a mysteriousguruwho shows up at her door and offers to show her the Way. Lucia must decide how to annex the guru, and turn this into a social success for herself. Daisy then brings in a Russian medium, Princess Popoffski. Lucia has a harder time whenoperadiva Olga Bracely arrives in Riseholme for a visit, luring away Lucia's devoted friend Georgie Pillson.

Benson based the character of Lucia on his sometime-friendMarie Corelli, a best-selling novelist. Corelli pretended to speak Italian, talked baby-talk with men, held piano concerts, and upheld the values and reputation of Shakespeare. Masters writes, "Marie Corelli was a monster of pretension who would have ruled the lives and manners ofStratfordpeople given half a chance, and Fred [Benson] pounced upon her every weakness with victorious glee, distilling them all into the awesome Lucia."[3]

Benson's 1916 book of short stories,The Freaks of Mayfair, informed his characters inQueen Lucia. "These include the effeminate bachelor, Aunt Georgie, who, with his music, embroidery, and hair dye, is clearly the ancestor of the much more sympathetically rendered Georgie Pillson, and Mrs. Weston, whose dabblings inyoga,Christian Science,spiritualism, andhealth foodanticipate Daisy Quantock's obsession with fads."[2]

A contemporary review inThe Bookmansays, "This is decidedly one of the most amazing and clever stories that Mr. Benson has written. It is a kind of cleverness which is familiar in fiction as well as in social intercourse, an unfeeling smartness which is satirical and sarcastic. Modern society, especially in the case of idle rich people, must be a constant temptation to the clever novelist, and Mr. Benson has alreaady shot his arrows at the crazes of society women in particular. But in this novel he is genial and delightful. There is no acid touch of superiority."[5]

Another contemporary review inThe Literary Digestsays, "The book is lacking in what we are constantly told is necessary for a good novel. There is not much plot; there is no love interest; there is no climax — the book just stops (much to our regret) after chronicling one more Riseholme failure in the line of spirit manifestation. But it is long since once has seen such a masterly bit of satire, such a piece of character-study as Lucia."[6]

Robert Kiernan writes that the Lucia novels "constitute a high point of camp...Queen Luciais a comedy of village manners, with a line clearly drawn between insiders and outsiders. References toBolshevismand revolutionary outrages may seem to suggest that Riseholme is something more than a village — a microcosm, even, of beleaguered monarchies the world over — but one is never permitted to take that seriously that analogy. Indeed, Riseholme is a stage set, not a sociopolitical entity."[1]

Benson wrote another book about a socially-striving heroine,Miss Mapp, in 1922. His second Lucia novel,Lucia in London, was published in 1927. He combined the two characters inMapp and Lucia(1931), as Lucia and Georgie leave Riseholme to take up lodgings in Mapp's fictional seaside town,Tilling. She remains there for another two books,Lucia's Progress(1935, published in the US asThe Worshipful Lucia), andTrouble for Lucia(1939).[1]

TheMapp and Luciaseries has been adapted for television twice, in a1985 seriesoriginally aired onChannel 4, and a2014 seriesonBBC One. While both adaptations begin with Lucia visiting Tilling (the beginning of the fourth book), the 2014 series adapted the Indian guru sequence fromQueen Lucia, transposing the guru's host from Daisy Quantock to Diva Plaistow.