Revoltretells the classic Christian story of thewar in Heavenbetweenangelsled by thearchangel Michaeland others led bySatan. The war ends with the defeat and casting to Earth of the latter.[2]The plot emphasises themes of protagonists fighting a ruling hierarchy, and attempting to escape it, as well as "hiddenness, delusion, revolution, and epiphany ... a literary exploration of existential choices in an apocalyptic context".[3]It is written, saysRené Boylesve, with a "deft levity".[4]Mutual antagonism between God and his angels is emphasised, which leads to disgruntlement and ultimately rebellion by the latter.[5]

The book tells the story of Arcade, the guardian angel of Maurice d'Esparvieu. Bored because Maurice d'Esparvieu continues sinning (has multiple love affairs), Arcade begins reading the books from the famous d'Esparvieu library on theology and realizes that God is not the creator of the Universe but a demiurge who rules with fear and ignorance. He informs Maurice that he will no longer be his guardian angel, moves to Paris and starts to look for other fallen angels who will join him in his quest to overthrow the false God. He and his comrades are able to build a huge army. Then they go to find Lucifer so that he may lead them. Lucifer welcomes them and tells them to stay the night and that he will give them an answer the next morning. At night he has a dream and in the morning he tells the angels that "God, conquered, will become Satan; Satan, conquering, will become God. May the fates spare me this terrible lot."

He says that replacing God with another is meaningless unless "in ourselves and in ourselves alone we attack and destroyIaldabaoth". Ialdabaoth is characterized inGnosticismas a malevolent lesser God who believes he himself alone is God, ignorant of the heavens above him. According to France, his name Ialdabaoth means "child who wanders".

France's political leanings—he was asocialist—heavily influencedRevolt, leading to the theme that successful revolutions always create greater tyrannies than those they overthrow.[6]The bitterness created by the revolt is reflected in the "biting and harsh" descriptions.[7]Joe Loewenberg has described the novel as an "imaginative narrative ... the ripest expression of Anatole France's urbane genius, a masterpiece of criticism at once ironic and eirenic".[8]

Essayist David Fuchs argues that much ofErnest Hemingway's early work suggests that he was probably aware of the book, even if he had not read it.[9]F. Scott FitzgeraldreferencesThe Revolt of the Angelsin his early short story "Dancing with a Ghost".[10]Fitzgerald also uses the book as apropin his story "The Offshore Pirate": the character Ardita is readingRevolt, herself looking, says Griffin, "conically angelic ... reading a book about angels". Fitzgerald draws attention toRevoltfive times in the story and argues that France's work is the more romantic of the two.[11]Revolthas been compared with the work ofGeorge Santayanain its suggestion that religion is set back by its successes.[12]Henry MillermentionsThe Revolt of the Angelsin his novelTropic of Capricorn.