Wanting to see the world and unable to live with his uncle anymore, Bunyip Bluegum thekoalasets out on his travels, taking only awalking stick. At about lunchtime, feeling more than slightly peckish, he meets Bill Barnacle thesailorand Sam Sawnoff theEmperor penguinwho are eating a magicsteak and kidney puddingwhich, no matter how much one eats it, always reforms into a whole pudding again. The pudding is called Albert, has thin arms and legs, and is bad-tempered and ill-mannered. His only pleasure is being eaten and on his insistence, Bill and Sam invite Bunyip to join them for lunch. They then set off on the road together, Bill explaining to Bunyip how he and Sam were once shipwrecked with a ship's cook on anicebergwhere the cook created the pudding which they now own.

Later on they encounter the Pudding Thieves, apossumnamed Patrick and awombatnamed Watkin. Bill and Sam bravely defend their pudding while Bunyip sits on Albert so that he cannot escape while they are not looking. Later that night sitting round the fire, Bill and Sam, grateful for his contributions of the day, invite Bunyip to join them and become a member of the Noble Society of Pudding Owners.

Later the next day, through some well-thought-out trickery, the Pudding Thieves make a successful grab for the Pudding. Upset and outraged, Bill and Sam fall into despair and it is up to Bunyip to get them to pull themselves together and set off to rescue their Pudding. In the course of tracking down the Pudding Thieves they encounter some rather pathetic and unsavoury members of society, but eventually manage to get led to the Pudding Thieves' lair. Bunyip's cleverness lures the robbers into a trap from where Bill and Sam's fists do the rest and they retrieve their pudding.

Some time later the Pudding Thieves approach the three Pudding Owners proclaiming that they bear gifts of good will and will present them to the pudding owners if they would only look inside a bag they have with them. When doing so they pull it over their heads and tie it up leaving them defenceless as the thieves take their pudding and run off.

An elderlyBasset hound, market gardener Benjamin Brandysnap, comes along and frees the Pudding Owners. The bag had been stolen from his stable, and he joins the Pudding Owners to get revenge on the Pudding Thieves. Another clever plan by Bunyip lures them into another trap where the Thieves are given yet another battering and the Pudding retrieved.

The next day the travellers come to the sleepy town of Tooraloo where they are approached by men dressed in suits and top hats and claiming to be the real owners of the Pudding. They turn out to be the Pudding Thieves up to yet another attempt at getting the Pudding and the subsequent fight brings along the Mayor and the cowardly localConstable. In the argument that follows, the bad-tempered Pudding pinches the Mayor, who orders his arrest.

The Pudding is taken to court where the only officials present are the judge and theusherwho are playing cards, but they prefer to eat the defendant rather than hear the case. To settle matters, Bunyip suggests that they hear the case themselves. Bill becomes theprosecutor, the Pudding Thieves are charged with the attempts to steal the Pudding and the theft of Benjamin Brandysnap's bag and the Mayor and the Constable stand in as “12 good men and true” — conceding that the unconstitutionality of the court is "better than a punch on the snout". The proceedings do not go well however, and result in utter chaos. When it is at its height, Bunyip suddenly announces that the Pudding has been poisoned. The judge, who has been eating away at the Pudding, goes suddenly crazy and attacks the usher, the Pudding Thieves, the Mayor and the Constable with a bottle ofport.

In reality, Albert was never poisoned and the Pudding Owners take advantage of the confusion to beat a hasty retreat. They then decide that it would be best to settle down somewhere rather than continue with their travelling. They build a house in a tree in Benjamin's garden and settle down to a life of ease.

Norman Lindsay, a well-known artist, illustrated the book himself with numerous black and white drawings, and also designed the cover. The original sketches can be seen at theState Library of New South Wales.[1]

The Magic Pudding Sculpture by Louis Laumen, based on Lindsay's illustrations, is the centrepiece of theIan PotterChildren's Garden in theRoyal Botanic Gardens, Melbourne.[2]

The Magic Puddingis said to have been written to settle an argument: Lindsay's friendBertram Stevenssaid that children like to read about fairies, while Lindsay asserted that they would rather read about food and fighting.[3][4]

First published in 1918,The Magic Puddingis considered a children's classic, "frequently compared in its appeal to Lewis Carroll'sAlice in Wonderland,[5]to and continues to be reprinted. The first edition was sold as a ‘guinea book’ (21 shillings). It was a limited edition quality art book.[6]Out-of-print outside Australia for many years, the book was re-issued in 2004 byThe New York Review Children's Collection.[7]In Australia a new edition was released in 2008 to celebrate the 90th anniversary of the book, and October 12 was declared "Pudding Day";[8]this new 2008 edition featured the original artwork as well as a biography, the first book reviews, letters between Lindsay and his publisher, and various recipes.[9]In 2018HarperCollinsreleased a centenary edition, and the State Library of New South Wales opened an exhibition of Lindsay's original drawings for the book.[10][11]

Philip Pullmanhas describedThe Magic Puddingas "the funniest children's book ever written"[7]and as his favourite book.[12]

In 1960Peter Scrivenadapted the book as apuppet show, for which Lindsay produced 40 drawings. Scriven'sMarionette Theatre of Australiacontinued to perform the puppet show around Australia until 1988.[13]

An animated feature-length film adaption was released in 2000, withJohn Cleesevoicing the title role,Hugo Weavingas Bill,Geoffrey Rushas Bunyip, andSam Neillas Sam.  It deviated heavily from Lindsay's book, received mixed reviews from critics, and was not a financial success.[14]

In 2010, Marian Street Theatre for Young People, based in Killara, NSW, presented an adaption of Lindsay's script. Adapted by Andrew James, the production was the first to portray most of the characters in Lindsay's story using actors, rather than puppetry.[15]

In 2013,Victorian OperapresentedThe Magic Pudding – The Opera. The music is by Calvin Bowman and the libretto is adapted from Lindsay's book byAnna Goldsworthy.[16]

In 1985 apostage stampdepicting an illustration from the book, was issued byAustralia Postas part of a set of five commemorating children's books.[17]