The diary begins on 3 April of an unstated year, and runs for approximately 15 months. In a short prologue, readers are informed thatCharles Pooterand his wife Caroline (Carrie) have just moved to a new home at "The Laurels", Brickfield Terrace,Holloway. Mr Pooter works as a clerk in theCityfirm of Perkupp's. The couple's 20-year-old son William works as a bank clerk inOldham. The first entries describe the Pooters' daily lives and introduce their particular friends, such as their neighbour Gowing, the enthusiastic bicyclist Cummings, and the Jameses fromSutton. From the beginning a pattern is set whereby the small vexations of the Pooters' daily lives are recounted, many of them arising from Pooter's unconscious self-importance and pomposity. Trouble with servants, tradesmen, and office juniors occur regularly, along with minor social embarrassments and humiliations.

The rare formal social events in the Pooters' lives are particular magnets for misfortune. They receive an invitation from theLord Mayor of Londonto attend a ball at theMansion Housefor "Representatives of Trade and Commerce". After days of keen anticipation they are dismayed, when they arrive, to find that the gathering is undistinguished. Pooter is snobbishly upset to be greeted familiarly by his local ironmonger, even more so when this tradesman appears to be on social terms with some of the more important guests. Pooter overindulges in champagne and humiliates Carrie by collapsing on the dance floor.

In the summer their son arrives from Oldham and informs his parents that he wishes henceforth to be called by his middle name, "Lupin". He has been dismissed from his bank post for idleness; although dismayed, Pooter sees this as a chance to get his son into Perkupp's. Lupin joins the couple for their annual holiday week inBroadstairs, but relationships are strained by Lupin's "fast" habits. On their return, Pooter's efforts to find Lupin a job at first prove fruitless. The boy is interested in amateur dramatics and joins an organisation called the "Holloway Comedians". With the help of Pooter's employer Mr. Perkupp, Lupin finally secures a clerical position with a firm of stockbrokers in November. He then shocks his parents by announcing his engagement.

Lupin's fiancée, Daisy Mutlar, is the sister of one of his theatrical friends and is, he says, "the nicest, prettiest, and most accomplished girl he ever met".   Pooter is disappointed when he meets her: "She is a big young woman... at least eight years older than Lupin. I did not even think her good-looking". Nevertheless, in her honour the Pooters give a large dinner-party, to which Pooter invites Mr Perkupp. The party becomes boisterous; Mr Perkupp arrives at a particularly raucous moment, and decides not to stay. Pooter believes the party has failed, and is despondent, although Carrie deems it a great success. However, within a few days, Lupin informs them that the engagement is off.

In the following weeks Lupin often brings the Holloway troupe back to "The Laurels". These occasions are graced with the unexplained presence of a complete stranger, Mr Padge, who regularly occupies the best chair as if by right. Lupin opts out of the family's Christmas celebrations, and then announces, to everyone's astonishment, that the engagement to Daisy is back on. Christmas passes happily enough, despite a supper party which degenerates into a food fight instigated by Daisy.

In the New Year, Pooter is promoted to senior clerk at Perkupp's, and his salary raised by £100 a year, but his achievement is overshadowed by Lupin's announcement that he has just profited by £200 through a timely shares speculation. Lupin persuades his father, and Gowing and Cummings, to invest small sums in Parachikka Chlorates, the source of his gains. The Pooters meet a new friend of Lupin's, Mr Murray Posh, who Pooter thinks is somewhat over-familiar with Daisy and might, he warns Lupin, be a rival for her hand. Lupin pooh-poohs this notion. Later, Pooter learns that he and his friends have lost their investment; indeed, Lupin's stockbroking firm has collapsed entirely and its principal has fled. Lupin is thus unemployed; worse, that same day the engagement of Daisy Mutlar to Murray Posh is announced. Lupin's only consolation, he tells his father, is that he persuaded Posh to invest £600 in Parachikka Chlorates. However, in Pooter's eyes the situation is redeemed when Mr Perkupp offers Lupin a clerkship.

April begins with another social disaster. The Pooters receive an invitation to a ball given by the East Acton Rifle Brigade, which they imagine will be a glittering occasion. It turns out to be shabby and down-at-heel; furthermore, having liberally supplied fellow-guests—among them Mr Padge—with food and drink which he thinks is free, Pooter is presented at the end with a large bill that he can barely afford to pay. Other social events also turn sour: a lunch party with Mr Finsworth, the father of an old friend, is marred by some unfortunate comments by Pooter on the Finsworth family portraits. On another occasion they meet a loud and over-opinionated American, Mr Hardfur Huttle, who, Pooter realises, is like a mature version of Lupin.

Lupin is sacked from Perkupp's for persuading their top client, Mr Crowbillon, to take his business to another firm. Pooter is mortified, but the new firm rewards Lupin with a £25 commission and a job at £200 a year. Lupin resumes his friendship with Murray Posh and Daisy, who is now Mrs Posh.   Lupin moves to lodgings in Bayswater, where Pooter and Carrie are invited to dine and where they meet Murray's sister, known as "Lillie Girl", a woman of around 30. Pooter learns that Murray Posh has settled £10,000 on both Daisy and "Lillie Girl".

Pooter is summoned to meet Hardfur Huttle, who offers Perkupp's a new client to replace Mr Crowbillon. Perkupp is so grateful to Pooter for this introduction that he buys up the freehold of "The Laurels" and presents thedeedsto Pooter. As the couple celebrate, a letter arrives from Lupin announcing his engagement to "Lillie Girl": "We shall be married in August, and among our guests we hope to see your old friends Gowing and Cummings".

TheDiarymade its initial appearance as an intermittent serial in the satirical weekly magazinePunch.[8]The first of the 26 instalments was announced in the issue of 26 May 1888 with a brief editorial note: "As everybody who is anybody is publishing Reminiscences, Diaries, Notes, Autobiographies, and Recollections, we are sincerely grateful to 'A Nobody' for permitting us to add to the historic collection".[9]The diary entry dates are several weeks behind the dates on which they appear inPunch.[10]ThePunchserialisation ended in May 1889 with the diary entry for 21 March, which records the Pooters and their friends celebrating the minor triumph of Lupin's appointment as a clerk at Perkupp's.[11]That was the intended end of the diary; however, when the writers were preparing the manuscript for publication as a book, they added a further four months' entries to the text, and included 26 illustrations by Weedon Grossmith.[8]

In June 1892J.W. Arrowsmith Ltdpublished theDiaryin book form,[8]although its critical and popular success was not evident until the third edition appeared in October 1910.   After the First World War the book's popularity continued to grow; regular reprintings and new editions ensured that thereafter the book was never out of print. Audiobook versions have been available since 1982.[12]The writerRobert McCrum, in a personal list of "The 100 greatest novels of all time" published inThe Observernewspaper, listed theDiaryat number 35.[13]

ThePunchserialisation attracted little critical comment;The Athenaeum's literary critic thought the series "may have escaped unnoticed amid better jokes".[15]When theDiarywas published as a book,Punchheralded it in its issue of 23 July 1892 as "very funny", adding: "not without a touch of pathos".[16]However, apart from a warmly approving report inThe Saturday Review, the book's initial critical reception was lukewarm. TheReview's critic thought the book "admirable, and in some of its touches [it] goes close to genius", with a natural and irresistible appeal: "TheDiaryhas amused us from cover to cover".[17]This contrasted with the negative judgement ofThe Athenaeum, which opined that "the book has no merit to compensate for its hopeless vulgarity, not even that of being amusing". It questioned the tastefulness of jokes aimed almost exclusively at the poverty of underpaid city clerks, and concluded: "Besides, it is all so dull".[15]The Speaker's critic thought the book "a study in vulgarity",[18]whileThe New York Times, reviewing the first American edition, found the work largely incomprehensible: "There is that kind of quiet, commonplace, everyday joking in it which we are to suppose is highly satisfactory to our cousins across the water ... Our way of manufacturing fun is different".[19]Although details of sales figures are not given, Arrowsmiths later acknowledged that the early editions of the book did not have a wide public impact.[20]

By 1910 theDiarywas beginning to achieve a reputation in London's literary and political circles. In his essay "On People in Books", published earlier that year, the writer and humouristHilaire Bellochailed theDiaryas "one of the half-dozen immortal achievements of our time ... a glory for us all".[21]Among others who recorded their appreciation of the work wereLord Rosebery, the former prime minister, who told Arrowsmiths that he thought he had "purchased and given away more copies than any living man ... I regard any bedroom I occupy as unfurnished without a copy of it".[22]Another essayist-cum-politician who added his tribute wasAugustine Birrell, who in 1910 occupied the cabinet post ofChief Secretary for Ireland. Birrell wrote that he ranked Charles Pooter alongsideDon Quixoteas a comic literary figure, and added a note of personal pride that one of the characters in the book—"an illiterate charwoman, it is true"—carried his name.[23]Arrowsmiths printed these appreciations as prefaces in the 1910 and subsequent issues. The 1910 edition proved immediately popular with the reading public, and was followed by numerous reprintings.[n 1]In its review of this editionThe Bookman'scritic wrote of Charles Pooter: "You laugh at him—at his small absurdities, his droll mishaps, his well-meaning fussiness; but he wins upon you and obtains your affection, and even your admiration, he is so transparently honest, so delightfully and ridiculously human".[24]

In its review of the book's fourth edition, published in 1919,The Bookmanobserved that the book was now a firm favourite with the public. "It has had many imitators ... but not one of them has rivalled the original, and they have all faded away". The reviewer recommended the book's "quaint drollery, its whimsical satire and delightfully quiet irony".[25]In Canada,Queen's Quarterlymagazine's sympathetic reception of the book contrasted with that ofThe New York Timesnearly 30 years previously. It praises the understated but lovable self-portrait of Pooter, and adds that "It is not till the second or third reading—and you are bound to reread it—that the really consummate art of this artless book becomes apparent".[26]The literary criticD. B. Wyndham Lewissummarised the Pooters as "warm, living, breathing, futile, half-baked, incredibly alive and endearing boneheads".[27]

The novelistEvelyn Waughhad been familiar with theDiarysince his childhood. It was a great favourite of his parents—Arthur Waughused to read passages aloud to his family,[28]and Evelyn's biographerSelina Hastingshas drawn attention to the distinctly Pooterish elements in the Waugh household.[29]Evelyn Waugh was initially contemptuous of the book, but grew to admire it, to the extent of writing in his 1930 essay "One Way to Immortality" that it was "the funniest book in the world". He added: "Nobody wants to read other people's reflections on life and religion and politics, but the routine of their day, properly recorded, is always interesting, and will become more so as conditions change with the years".[30]Morton posits that several of the leading characters in Waugh's early novels, though socially far removed from the Pooters, share the bafflement of Charles and Carrie with the problems of a changing world.[8]In his 1945 novelBrideshead Revisited, Waugh has Lady Marchmain comforting her family by reading aloud from theDiary"with her beautiful voice and great humour of expression".[31]Morton suggests that one of the work's attractions to Waugh was his personal identification with Lupin, and the way in which the disapproved son (as Waugh saw himself) repeatedly manages to turn adverse circumstances to his ultimate advantage.[8]

At about the time that Waugh was discovering his affection for theDiaryanother writer,J. B. Priestley, was extolling it as an exemplar ofEnglish humour;Jerome K. Jerome, Priestley asserted, never wrote anything as good: "[P]oor Mr Pooter, with his simplicity, his timidity, his goodness of heart, is not simply a figure of fun but one of those innocent, lovable fools who are dear to the heart".[32]In a 1943 essay,George Orwellconsidered the book an accurate account of English life in the 1880s. In describing Pooter he revived the Don Quixote analogy but saw this English equivalent as a sentimentalised version of the original, one who "constantly suffers disasters brought upon him by his own folly".[33]In the years after the Second World War the book's stock remained high;Osbert Lancasterdeemed it "a great work of art",[34]and similar enthusiasm was expressed by a new generation of writers and social historians.Gillian Tindall, writing in 1970, thought theDiary"the best comic novel in the language", and lauded Pooter as "the presiding shade" of his era.[35]This accolade was echoed a further generation on byA. N. Wilson, who wrote in his study of the Victorian era: "Who is to say that Oscar Wilde and Aubrey Beardsley are more typical of the [1890s] than the lower-middle class Charles and Carrie Pooter?"[36]Wilson also observed the extent to which the Pooters had become recognised as "arbiters of the greatest good taste", as the late 20th-century English middle classes sought to acquire or preserve authentic Victorian features in their carefully crafted "period" homes.[37]ASpectatorarticle of 2008 remarks on how such houses as "The Laurels", the humble habitats of 1890s City clerks, had by the 21st century become desirable £1 million-plus homes in what it terms "banker land".[38]

Peter Bailey, in his study "White Collars, Gray Lives" (1999), traces the beginnings of literary interest in the lower-middle classes to the "disquieting irruption of a new breed of petty bourgeois shop and office workers" that faced Victorian writers in the last quarter of the 19th century.[39]The Grossmiths'Diarywas a typical satire of its time; it probed the lower-middle class lives of the Pooters and poked fun at their pretensions and petty concerns. Tony Joseph calls theDiary"a sharp analysis of social insecurity".[4]Although many writers had themselves come from humble backgrounds, they often sought to disguise their origins through scorn: "putting the boot in on the lower middle classes", says Bailey, "has long been the intellectual's blood sport".[40]However, the quarter-century following the publication ofThe Diary of a Nobodysaw a tendency to mix mockery with sympathy, even approval. In the works of writers such asGeorge Gissing,H. G. Wells,Arnold BennettandE. M. Forster, characters emerged who, despite the recognisably Pooterish aspects of their lives, were by no means entirely absurd. Bennett and Wells could poke fun at figures such as "Denry Machin", "Mr Polly" or "Mr Lewisham", while at the same time celebrating their fortitude, energy and determination to look for better things. In cases such as these, writes Bailey, "disdain could change to admiration and national self-identification, as the Little Man ... was transposed into Everyman, a model of cheerful resilience in times of crisis."[40][41]

During the past century, the fictitious diary has developed as an accepted means of comedic expression; the original has, says Morton, "been fertile ground which has germinated many seeds".[8]An early example isAnita Loos's novel of 1925:Gentlemen Prefer Blondes: The Illuminating Diary of a Professional Ladyin which the protagonist,Lorelei Lee, records her flirtatious adventure in prose that "follows the mannerisms of colloquial speech" and suggests innocence or ignorance yet, the critic Elyse Graham observes, "burlesques, in excoriating detail, the vernacular of the American middle class".[42]The diary genre became particularly popular in the late 20th century. In 1978–81Christopher Matthewproduced three volumes of diaries recording the daily life of "Simon Crisp", a bachelor would-be man-about town of the era.[43]The title of the first,The Diary of a Somebody, is a direct reference to the Grossmith original. Reviewing this volume inThe Spectator,Benny Greenpoints out several parallels with the original, in both character and event. Matthew's book, says Green, is amusing, but the Grossmiths' book is superior; it is "affecting as well as comical, in a way that the Matthew pastiche is not".[44]In 1982 came the first appearance ofSue Townsend's teenage creation,Adrian Mole, whose passage into young manhood and early middle age is charted in a long series of diaries. The more middle-aged he becomes, says Morton, the more he resembles Pooter.[45]

Keith Waterhouse'sMrs Pooter's Diaryof 1983 is an adaptation of the Grossmith original that shifts the narrative voice to Carrie Pooter.[46]In 1996Helen Fieldingused the imaginary diary format forBridget Jones's Diary, which records the daily paraphernalia of a single woman's life.The New York Timescritic wrote that it "captures neatly the way modern women teeter between 'I am woman' independence and a pathetic girlie desire to be all things to all men."[47]This diary began as a weekly column inThe Independent. In the 1990s the satirical magazinePrivate EyelampoonedJohn Major, British prime minister 1990–97, in "The Secret Diary of John Major aged 473⁄4", a hybrid of the Adrian Mole diaries withThe Diary of a Nobody, which made much fun of Major's lower-middle class origins.[48][n 2]